CIRC4FooD Platform: An Intelligent Management System Supporting Sustainable 
Urban Agriculture 
 
Dimitra Tsiakou, Lucyna Łękawska-Andrinopoulou, Marios Palazis-Aslanidis, Vassilis Nousis, Georgios 
Tsimiklis, Maria Krommyda, Angelos Amditis, Evangelia Latsa 
Institute of Communication and Computer Systems, National Technical University of Athens 
Athens, Greece 
email: dimitra.tsiakou@iccs.gr 
 
 
Abstract—An online monitoring platform for urban vegetable 
gardens is described. The platform has been developed within 
the project ‘A circular economy inspired food production 
system’ (CIRC4FooD) as a part of intelligent management 
system for the urban vegetable gardens, with the wider aim to 
engage the user and to promote and inform about circular 
economy and sustainable food systems. The CIRC4FooD 
integrated system constitutes of a garden equipped with 
rainwater harvesting system, composting bin and intelligent 
management system, namely the platform and incorporated 
Internet of Things (IoT) technologies: diverse sensors for soil 
and air parameters, for rainwater tank and for compost. The 
implementation of a dynamic rule engine consisting of three 
modules: i) environmental, ii) water tank and iii) compost, 
allows the users to get notification about any actions required 
or recommended from their side to keep the garden in proper 
condition, but also to assure environmental benefit (i.e., saving 
water resources by using harvested water, watering the garden 
only when real need arises, use of compost as fertilizer, etc.). In 
this paper the preliminary system and platform design are 
presented, which might be further improved followed by next 
steps that are scheduled within the CIRC4FooD project to test 
the platform in real life conditions and in different scales. 
Keywords-monitoring platform; dynamic rule engine; urban 
vegetable gardens, sustainability 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
Food production poses a significant environmental 
burden that accounts for 10%-30% of an individual’s 
environmental impact [1]. According to the recent report 
from the Food and Agriculture Organization [2], current food 
production systems are facing several challenges: (a) 
growing demand for food, driven by increasing world 
population and urbanization; (b) diminishing land and water 
resources and their declining quality; (c) climate change, and 
at the same time significant contribution of the agricultural 
sector to this phenomenon; and (d) too few investments in 
solutions contributing to sustainable agriculture. 
Due to the environmental stress on water bodies, harmful 
land use practices, soil depletion and greenhouse gas 
emissions, the need for sustainable agriculture solutions is 
rapidly growing. The ever-present efforts to improve the 
agricultural yield with fewer resources and labor have 
resulted in significant innovations throughout human history. 
Despite those efforts, growing population rate never let the 
demand match the actual supply. The world population is 
expected to reach 9.8 billion in 2050, resulting in an increase 
of approximately 25% from the current figure [3]. 
Listed challenges, in line with destructive effect, that 
traditional, linear economy has on the food system, poses 
increasing pressure on the food system, creating urgency for 
resilient and sustainable food systems.  
CIRC4Food project introduces a solution for local food 
production systems, contributing to the promotion and 
dissemination of sustainable food system. CIRC4Food 
system for food production, consists of a vegetable garden 
equipped with a rain water harvesting system and a 
composting bin. The numerous environmental, social and 
health benefits of urban vegetable gardens have been proven 
by a number of studies [4-6]. The CIRC4FooD system will 
be supported through an intelligent management system and 
will introduce user-friendly CIRC4FooD platform with user 
engaging functionalities, with the aim of promoting 
sustainable use of natural resources.  
The rest of the manuscript is structured as follows. 
Section II describes the smart farming concept and the 
integrated system for application in urban vegetable gardens 
proposed by the CIRC4FooD project. Section III describes 
the system design, including user requirements collection, as 
well as user journey and user flow, user types and the 
concept behind reward system to be developed. Section IV 
addresses the platform design including its architecture, the 
rule engine and the platform view. Finally, Section V 
concludes on the work and outlines next steps. The work is 
closed by acknowledgements. 
II. 
SMART FARMING AND CIRC4FOOD 
Smart 
farming, 
as 
a 
coupling 
of 
information, 
communication and control technologies in agriculture, is an 
idea that gains ground gradually. Smart farming is a 
management concept of using modern technology to increase 
the quantity and quality of agricultural products. The concept 
involves an integration of information and communication 
technologies into machines, sensors, actuators, and network 
equipment for use in agricultural production systems [7]. 
These applications are the driving force for the development 
of innovation in precision and sustainable farming.  
Numerous software developments are available in the 
market [8-9], designed to make the farmer’s tasks more 
efficient. However, as every particular application has 
1
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-968-3
WEB 2022 : The Tenth International Conference on Building and Exploring Web Based Environments

specific characteristics, no “one-size fits all” technology is 
available. To improve the sustainability, there is a need for 
site specific strategies for both decision makers and farmers. 
Some of the specific aspects of interest of the system design 
and selection involve: the assessment of the techno-
economic and environmental impact of an urban farming 
system, choice of crops and optimization of economic and 
environmental parameters. Obtaining the optimal design and 
operational plan poses a major challenge [10]. Nevertheless, 
the usage of all these information in the field is usually 
limited to the aforementioned aspects and for this reason, an 
inclusive and multipurpose monitoring platform is proposed, 
which explicitly supports the management and optimization 
of the performance of a vegetable garden, with special 
attention to compost fertilizers production and use and 
operation of water harvesting system contributing to 
sustainable urban farming systems. 
In regards to that, the intelligent urban vegetable gardens 
in CIRC4FooD project, use technological resources that help 
in various stages of the production process, such as 
monitoring of crops, irrigation and composting process 
control. More precise, CIRC4FooD integrated system, as 
revealed in Figure 1, for implementation in urban vegetable 
gardens consists of the following elements: i) garden itself, 
ii) rain water harvesting and storing system, iii) composting 
bin, iv) intelligent management system integrating on-line 
monitoring platform and IoT technologies (including 
sensors).  
Figure 1.  CIRC4FooD integrated system (own work). 
Τhe aforementioned sensors will be acquired within the 
purpose of the project and upon completion, the 
participating users will retain those sensors. More 
specifically, soil moisture sensors will be installed in the 
vegetable garden, humidity and temperature sensors inside 
the compost bin, as well as water level and Total Dissolved 
Solids (TDS) sensors inside the water tank. 
III. 
SYSTEM DESIGN 
A. User Requirements Collection 
The purpose of the requirements collection is to 
understand the needs of the end-users and the problems they 
seek to resolve with the specific platform. In order to extract 
the requirements from the end-user’s standpoint, following 
factors affecting the urban farming, were taken into account: 
• 
Weather: Farming mainly depends on weather 
conditions. Farmers face great risk in growing crops, 
as insufficient rainfall and water supply can damage 
the crop or lead to a decrease in farm produce. 
Considering the fact, that different plants require 
different parameters of weather conditions, an all-
purpose and simplified system – that is suitable for 
numerous crops – was established. 
• 
Lack of knowledge and skill: Literacy is one of the 
most important factors affecting all the sectors. Lack 
of literacy results in farmers being unaware of 
changes occurring in the farming sector. Informing 
end-users about the dedicated activities, regarding 
the vegetable garden, motivates the interested parties 
to sustainable thinking. 
• 
Seeds/fertilizers/disease: To grow crops of good 
quality, 
selection 
of 
seeds 
and 
appropriate 
knowledge about fertilizers is required. Additionally, 
timely and proper detection of plants affected by 
disease can save the farmer from loss and helps in 
gaining crop security. A repository with information 
about plants, their characteristics, possible diseases 
and advice on handling them will be available for 
users. 
• 
Water 
scarcity: 
A 
more 
efficient 
irrigation 
management, focused on reducing the capacities of 
water 
applied 
and 
therefore 
optimizing 
the 
conservation of irrigation water is conceivable 
through the platform, that helps the end-user to plan 
the irrigation activities. 
• 
Promotion of circularity in food production: The 
shift from a linear model to a circular model can 
meaningfully decrease the negative burdens on the 
environment 
and 
contribute 
to 
reestablishing 
biodiversity and natural resources. With this aim, the 
presented platform can play a relevant role in setting 
the paths of this transition, nurturing the shift 
towards a more sustainable agriculture. 
Based on the aforementioned factors and through a 
dedicated questionnaire that was conducted during the 
CIRC4FooD project by e-Trikala, which is the responsible 
partner for the implementation of the urban vegetable 
gardens in the city of Trikala during the CIRC4FooD project, 
user requirements were collected, which are focused on i) 
standardized data (sensors data, weather data, user or 
hardcoded 
data); 
and 
ii) 
functional 
requirements 
(personalization, authentication, authorization, scalability, 
usability, localization, etc.). 
B. User Journey and User Flow 
User Journey refers to the scenarios in which the user 
interacts with the product. This visual representation is 
commonly created as a timeline of actions or steps by a 
facilitator, built up on feedback collected methodically (via 
observations, interviews, focus groups, etc.). As a result, the 
technique’s main function is to assume and demonstrate the 
current and possible way in which the user can interact with 
2
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-968-3
WEB 2022 : The Tenth International Conference on Building and Exploring Web Based Environments

the process. User Journeys deal with emotions, pain points, 
and motivations of the end-users [11]. For this aim, the 
establishment started with the completion of a user journey 
map. The developed map is a visualization of the step by step 
experience as the user goes through the platform, following 
the diagram as shown in Figure 2. 
Figure 2.  Concept of User Journey (own work). 
User Flow refers to the process in which user takes 
advantage of the complex routes through a series of 
templates, designed for a product to accomplish their goal. It 
is created to predict and show the possible routes, through 
which the user interacts with the product. User Flows are 
usually depicted by flow charts, they are a set of steps taken 
by a user to achieve a goal using a digital product. Rather 
than demonstrating, how the users are supposed to feel, a 
User Flow is the breakdown of the actual user interface. 
Designing how a user interacts with a product is a key step in 
figuring out, where the issues may arise in task flows [12]. 
Having finalized the User Journey and the User Flow, 
user types were selected and ways to accomplish user 
engagement with maximum impact were identified. 
C. User Types and Reward System 
To assure comprehensive and effective knowledge 
acquisition, users of the platform are assigned into one of the 
following user types: novice, advanced beginner, competent, 
experienced. The assignment is based on the self-assessment 
performed by the user based on the information provided for 
each level of expertise and adapted from [13] for the needs 
of the platform.  
Reward system will be implemented based on the user 
engagement, allowing the users that are most active to be 
upgraded to higher levels of expertise as they gain 
knowledge and know-how.  
IV. 
PLATFORM DESIGN  
A. Architecture  
The architecture of the web platform follows the 
principles of a MERN full-stack development. MERN stack 
is a JavaScript stack, that is used for easier and faster 
deployment of full-stack web applications. MERN Stack 
comprises of 4 technologies namely: MongoDB, Express, 
React and Node.js and it is designed to make the 
development process smoother and easier as depicted in 
Figure 3. 
Figure 3.  Architecture of the CIRC4FooD platform (own work). 
MongoDB is an open-source document database built on 
a horizontal scale-out architecture that uses a flexible schema 
for storing data [14]. In the CIRC4FooD platform, 
MongoDB is used to store as object-collections information 
related to the system users, their integrated system and the 
notifications extracted from the rule-engine. 
Express is a prebuilt Node.js framework that can help 
creating server-side web applications and APIs faster and 
smarter. Simplicity, minimalism, flexibility and scalability 
are some of its characteristics, and since it is made in Node.js 
itself, it inherited its performance as well. 
On the client-side part there is React.js. React is an open-
source, component-based front-end library, responsible only 
for the view layer of the application. It is maintained by 
Facebook. Using functional programming, hooks and JSX, 
React designs simple views for each state in the application, 
and will efficiently update and render just the right 
component when the data changes. As a front-end 
framework, React communicates with the back-end by 
making API calls on the endpoints created by Express. 
The last technology is Node.js. Node is an open source 
development platform for executing JavaScript code server-
side. It is intended to run on a dedicated HTTP server and to 
employ a single thread with one process at a time [15]. 
Node.js 
applications 
are 
event-based 
and 
run 
asynchronously. In the CIRC4FooD platform, Node.js has a 
central role as it is the one responsible for serving the client-
side code, managing the Express APIs and communicating 
with the MongoDB database. Moreover, Node.js fetches data 
from a third party API related to the current values of each 
sensor placed on the gardens and stores them to the proper 
collections in the Mongo database. Furthermore, it handles 
the authentication and role system for the users as long as the 
reward system and the dynamic rule-engine, that creates the 
proper notifications for the platform users. More about the 
rule-engine and the reward system will be presented in the 
following paragraphs. 
3
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-968-3
WEB 2022 : The Tenth International Conference on Building and Exploring Web Based Environments

B. Dynamic Rule Engine 
The process of preparing a rule base in CIRC4FooD can 
be divided into several consecutive steps that are presented 
in Figure 4 below, wherein several layers are created: data 
collection from several sensors (as described in Figure 1), 
system modelling and rule selection, environmental 
sustainability, deployment of rules and also system 
optimization. The rules guiding the dynamic rule engine 
were constructed with two main purposes: i) to promote 
sustainability and natural resource preservation and ii) 
maximize user engagement. In order to assure user 
engagement, the number of received notifications, but also 
their exact content is adjusted to the level of experience of 
the user. The higher the level of experience, the higher 
number of notifications user gets, while their content 
becomes less explanatory and more informative. This is 
illustrated well with the examples of notifications presented 
in Table 1. 
Figure 4.  Outline of the process of prepearation of the rule base in 
CIRC4FooD (own work). 
TABLE I.  
EXAMPLES OF NOTIFICATIONS FOR FOUR USER TYPES 
Condition 
description 
User Type 
Novice 
Advanced 
Beginner 
Competent 
Experienced 
Air humidity 
< 30% and 
soil moisture 
<20% 
 
The soil 
moisture 
levels are 
below 
optimal and 
air 
humidity is 
low. 
Consider 
watering 
your crops. 
Crops in 
conditions 
like today's 
will most 
probably 
need water. 
 
Air humidity 
today will be 
low and soil 
moisture 
readings 
indicate that 
your crops 
need water. 
Air humidity 
< 30% and 
soil moisture 
<20% 
 
Water 
tank 
level: full 
N/A 
Your water 
tank is full, 
now is the 
time to save 
natural 
water 
resources. 
Water tank is 
full. 
 
Water tank is 
full. 
 
Compost 
moisture 
>60 % 
Your pile 
moisture 
levels are 
above the 
optimum. 
To keep 
them within 
the optimal 
range mix 
in some 
Your 
compost is 
too wet. Mix 
in  
newspaper 
strips, dry 
wood chips 
or pieces of 
cardboard. 
 
The optimal 
levels of 
moisture 
range 
between 40 
to 60 %. 
Today the 
moisture 
level is >60 
%. Take 
Compost 
moisture > 60 
% 
 
Condition 
description 
User Type 
Novice 
Advanced 
Beginner 
Competent 
Experienced 
newspaper 
strips, dry 
wood chips 
or pieces of 
cardboard. 
appropriate 
actions! 
The rule engine consists of three modules: i) 
environment, ii) water tank and iii) compost. The module 
environment gathers rules related to the environmental 
parameters influencing plant growth, with special attention 
to those related to watering. Parameters taken into 
consideration in this module are following: soil moisture, air 
humidity, likelihood of precipitation, temperature, light 
intensity and wind speed. 
Module water tank describes the rules associated with 
water level and TDS amount in the water tank, but also the 
water level in combination with probability of precipitation 
and soil moisture, to assure that water is used only when a 
need arises. 
Module compost is built to support the composting bin 
notifications in relation to compost temperature and 
compost moisture. Compost temperature and compost 
moisture are two critical parameters for the process of 
compost production. Compost temperature is additionally a 
crucial parameter in compost monitoring [16]. Monitoring 
temperature 
evolution 
along 
time 
provides 
critical 
information about the course of composting and assures 
safety of the produced material (eliminating the risk of 
microbial contamination) [17], as well as safety of the 
process itself (avoiding fire hazard). 
The conditions are assigned impact values based on the 
literature research and the CIRC4Food aspirations, namely 
user engagement, awareness raising and saving natural 
resources, especially water. The impact values affect the 
notifications scheme of the rule engine, which is build on 
threshold values. The user receives notification only, if the 
threshold value is equal or surpassed by the impact value. 
The threshold value (and therefore whether or not the 
notification will be received) is determined by the user type. 
The dynamic rule engine is designed in such way, that 
additional rules can be implemented, if need arises. 
C. CIRC4FooD Platform view 
The front-end application exposes to the user a pleasant 
and interactive interface, through which the user can access 
all the services exposed by the back-end application. The 
CIRC4FooD interface is responsive, so the user experience 
on the platform is of high-quality regardless of the device 
used (laptop, PC, table or phone). In addition, CIRC4FooD 
platform allows end-users to explore and analyse 
agricultural and weather data with zero-programming 
efforts. The User Interface (UI) exploits concepts that the 
user is familiar with and facilitates further understanding 
(through, e.g., plots, studies, sensor device, etc.), as defined 
in the data model and the rule engine. The initial UI is 
depicted in Figure 5, Figure 6 and Figure 7. 
4
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-968-3
WEB 2022 : The Tenth International Conference on Building and Exploring Web Based Environments

Figure 5.  Welcome Page of the CIRC4FooD Platform (own work). 
Figure 6.  Homepage/Dashboard view (own work). 
Figure 7.  My gardens page (own work). 
The UI is still a work in progress, aiming to achieve an 
intuitive visualization, that will depict the requirements of 
the end-users in order to contribute to the promotion of the 
sustainable urban agriculture. 
V. 
CONCLUSION 
The CIRC4FooD platform is created to enable efficient 
management of urban vegetable gardens. In parallel, by 
engaging the user at different levels, it has the ambition to 
offer educational and awareness raising advantage. In this 
paper we present the ongoing work related to the platform 
development describing system and platform design. 
CIRC4FooD platform will be tested in real life settings in 
the coming months. The demonstration will last around 6 
months in the city of Trikala in Greece and will start once the 
complete CIRC4FooD system is set up. Demonstrations will 
be performed in private gardens belonging to citizens of 
Trikala, in public, popular spaces of the city and in several 
schools. The testing phase will be accompanied by a series of 
seminars of informative and education character aimed at the 
users of the CIRC4FooD platform. It is expected that as a 
results of demonstration activities and received feedback, 
some features of the platform might be subject to change. 
Additionally, user reward system will be implemented and a 
repository for the users with information about how to use 
the platform and facts about the plants (e.g., preferences and 
common diseases) will be developed. 
AKNOWLEDGMENT 
This research is co-funded by Greece and the European 
Union 
through 
the 
Operational 
Programme 
Competitiveness, Entrepreneurship and Innovation 2014-
2020 
(EPAnEK) 
[code: 
T2EΔΚ-03899, 
project: 
CIRC4FooD – A circular economy inspired food production 
system]. 
REFERENCES 
[1] F. Stoessel, R. Juraske, S. Pfister, and S. Hellweg, “Life Cycle 
Inventory and Carbon Water FoodPrint of Fruits and 
Vegetables Application to a Swiss Retailer” Environ. Sci. 
Technol vol 46, 6, pp 3253–3262, February 2012, doi: 
10.1021/es2030577. 
[2] FAO, 2021, “The State of the World’s Land and Water 
Resources for Food and Agriculture – Systems at breaking 
point”, 
Synthesis 
report 
2021, 
Rome, 
https://doi.org/10.4060/cb7654en. 
[3] United Nations, Department of Economic and Social Affairs, 
Population Division (2017), “World Population Prospects: 
The 2017 Revision, Key Findings and Advance Tables”, 
Working Paper No. ESA/P/WP/248. 
[4] V. Egli, M. Oliver, and E. Tautolo, “The Development of a 
Model of Community Garden Benefits to Wellbeing” 
Preventive Medicine Reports, Vol. 3, 2016, pp. 348-352, 
doi:10.1016/j.pmedr.2016.04.005. 
[5] M. I. Cabral, S. Costa, U. Weiland, and A. Bonn, “Urban 
gardens as multifunctional nature-based solutions for societal 
goals in a changing climate.” in: Nature-based solutions to 
climate change adaptation in urban areas. Theory and practice 
of urban sustainability transitions. N. Kabisch, H. Korn, J. 
Stadler, A. Bonn, Eds. Springer, Cham, pp. 237-253 2017. 
[6] M. Clarke, M. Davidson, M. Egerer, E. Anderson, and N. T. 
Fouch, “The Underutilized Role of Community Gardens in 
Improving Cities’ Adaptation to Climate Change: A Review”, 
People, Place and Policy 12 (3), pp. 241-251, Feb. 2019 doi: 
10.3351/ppp.2019.3396732665. 
[7] D. Pivoto et al.,“Scientific development of smart farming 
technologies and their application in Brazil”, Information 
Processing in Agriculture, Vol 5 (1), pp. 21-32, March 2018, 
doi: 10.1016/j.inpa.2017.12.002. 
[8] W. M. Júnior, T. T. B. Valeriano, and R. G. de Souza, 
“EVAPO: A smartphone application to estimate potential 
evapotranspiration using cloud gridded meteorological data 
5
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-968-3
WEB 2022 : The Tenth International Conference on Building and Exploring Web Based Environments

from NASA-POWER system”, Computers and Electronics in 
Agriculture, 
Volume 
156, 
2019, 
pp. 
187-192, 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compag.2018.10.032. 
[9] A. J. Johnson et al., 2018, “Flavor-Cyber-Agriculture: 
Optimization of plant metabolites in an open-source control 
environment through surrogate modeling”, PLoS ONE 14(4). 
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0213918. 
[10] L. Li, X. Li, C. Chong, C. Wang, and X. Wang, “A decision 
support framework for the design and operation of sustainable 
urban farming systems”, Journal of Cleaner Production, 
Volume 
268, 
2020, 
121928, 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2020.121928. 
[11] T. 
Howard, 
“Journey 
mapping: 
a 
brief 
overview.”, 
Communication Design Quarterly vol 2, (3), pp. 10–13, May 
2014, doi:10.1145/2644448.2644451. 
[12] Product 
School 
Inc., 
2022 
https://productschool.com/blog/product-management-
2/experience/user-flows-vs-user-journeys/ 
(last 
visited: 
15/02/2022). 
[13] H. L. Dreyfus, S. E. Dreyfus, and T. Athanasiou. 
(1986), “Mind over machine: The power of human intuition 
and expertise in the era of the computer”, New York: Free 
Press. 
[14] MongoDB, Inc. 2021 https://www.mongodb.com/why-use-
mongodb (last visited: 20/02/2022). 
[15] OpenJS Foundation, Node.js https://nodejs.org/en/ (last 
visited: 20/02/2022). 
[16] B. Paulin, and P. O’Malley “Compost production and use in 
horticulture”, Department of Primary Industries and Regional 
Development, Western Australia, Perth. Bulletin 4746, 2008. 
Compost production and use in horticulture (agric.wa.gov.au). 
[17] E. Vandaele, Vlaco, “Hygienisation requirements for 
composting”, Workpackage 5, Repost 2, Oct 2019 available 
at: https://northsearegion.eu/media/16203/hygienisation_-for-
soilcomher.pdf 
(last 
visited: 
23/02/2022).
     
6
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-968-3
WEB 2022 : The Tenth International Conference on Building and Exploring Web Based Environments

