A Graph Model of Events Focusing on Granularity and Relations Towards
Organization of Collective Intelligence on History
Minoru Naito
Graduate School of Informatics
Kyoto University
Kyoto, Japan
naito@db.soc.i.kyoto-u.ac.jp
Yasuhito Asano
Graduate School of Informatics
Kyoto University
Kyoto, Japan
asano@i.kyoto-u.ac.jp
Masatoshi Yoshikawa
Graduate School of Informatics
Kyoto University
Kyoto, Japan
yoshikawa@i.kyoto-u.ac.jp
Abstract—We propose Event Graph Model to organize
collective intelligence on history and acquire useful knowledge
of events. Our Event Graph Model represents a complicated
event of various granularities as a graph composed of nodes
corresponding to smaller-grained events and edges correspond-
ing to relations between the events. This model is expected
to be useful for ﬁnding events whose structures are similar
to each other. In other words, our model would be able to
distinguish such events from ones similar by vocabulary but
different substantially, although previously proposed keyword-
based event analyses could not.
Keywords-Collective intelligence; Model of Events.
I. INTRODUCTION
The investigation of history is important for the future of
humankind. As it has been said that history repeats itself,
we might be able to infer a solution of a current problem
by drawing a lesson from knowledge of past events similar
or related to the problem. However, historical knowledge is
too massive for common people to ﬁnd and understand such
events.
Automatic analysis and organization of historical knowl-
edge could be helpful for people to ﬁnd and understand
events. Several methods have been proposed to analyze
events utilizing news articles [1], [2], [3]. Although these
methods are useful for understanding events roughly, they
are insufﬁcient for our motivation that people draw a lesson
from historical knowledge. For example, the two articles
illustrated in Figure 1 represent events similar by vocabulary
but different radically; in the left article a famine ﬁrst
occurred and consequently a reform was carried out; in the
right article a famine wasted the reform. The methods above
might not distinguish them because they regard an article
as an event and use few keywords to represent an event.
Therefore, a model of events should be able to analyze the
granularity of events more ﬂexibly, and organize various
kinds of relations between events.
In this paper, we propose an event graph model, ab-
breviated to EGM, that represents a large event, named
composite event, in a given article by a graph whose node
corresponds to a small event, named minimal event, and
Figure 1.
Events that are similar by vocabulary but different.
edge represents the relation between two minimal events.
In order to establish EGM, we ﬁrst deﬁne two types of
a minimal event which can not be divided on a sentence
in the given article: an event noun phrase and an event
predicate-argument structure. An event noun phrase is a
noun phrase which can represent an event by itself. If
we divide the noun phrase into several elements, then no
elements can represent an event. Therefore, it is adequate
that we regard an event noun phrase as a minimal event.
A predicate-argument structure in a sentence, abbreviated
to PAS, is called an event predicate-argument structure,
abbreviated to EPAS, if its predicate represents an action
related to an event. For example, sentence “Date Muratoki
revived the economy of his feudal domain” contains an
EPAS because its predicate “revived” represents an action
in the economic revival; on the other hand, the predicate of
sentence “Tokugawa Ieyasu had been told as a descendant
of Nitta Yoshishige” is not regarded as an action of a
historical event. If a sentence has two predicates representing
actions of events, then we regard the sentence contains two
EPAS. We then introduce the following eight kinds of a
relation between minimal events: deployment, illustration,
parataxis, causality, paradox, progress, means, and situation.
In contrast to models dealing with the causality relation
between events [1], our eight kinds of relations are expected
to ﬁnd similar events more accurately. We also present an
idea how to determine which events have a relation by
utilizing the centering theory proposed by Grosz et al. [5],
[6]. Figure 2 illustrates an example of composite events in
111
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-248-6
WEB 2013 : The First International Conference on Building and Exploring Web Based Environments

Figure 2.
Examples of minimal and composite events.
Figure 3.
Composite events for Mizuno, Date, and Roosevelt.
our EGM constructed from several sentences in Wikipedia
article “Date Muratoki.” Each solid circle represents a min-
imal event; an arrow represents the relation between two
minimal events. Each open circle represents a composite
event; note that an arbitrary connected subgraph can be
regarded as a composite event despite only two composite
events are shown in the ﬁgure.
Once we succeed in establishing EGM, then we might be
able to ﬁnd similar events accurately enough for our motiva-
tion. For example, Figure 3 portrays three composite events
extracted from three Wikipedia articles “Mizuno Tadakane,”
“Date Muratoki,” and “Franklin Roosevelt.” The composite
events for Mizuno and Date contain similar minimal events:
nodes 2 and 7 represent reforms, and nodes 3 and 5 represent
famines. However, the orders of the minimal events are
different: the reform is before the famine for Mizuno, while
the famine is before the reform for Date. Therefore, these
events should be regarded as different. On the other hand, the
composite event for Date is similar to that for Roosevelt in
both of the content of minimal events and their relations.
We plan to propose a method for ﬁnding events having
similar structures by applying techniques based on graph
theory including graph isomorphism and topological minor.
As work in progress, we have implemented the extraction
of minimal events and the determination which events have
a relation. We also have a preliminary experiment on the
extraction of minimal events. We use Wikipedia articles
about people as a dataset because they contain a plenty
knowledge of historical events and the following charac-
teristics useful for acquiring the information of events: the
explanation of events are usually described in chronological
order; speciﬁc expression can be normalized easily using
wiki links; attributes of an article are readily identiﬁable by
category; an article has fewer subjective opinions and has
many descriptions of objective facts; entity information is
included in the article because of the principle of “one entity
– one article.” For example, we utilize wiki links to identify
event noun phrase in the implementation of the extraction
of minimal events.
II. RELATED WORK
Ishii et al. [1] proposed a method for constructing a
network of events to illustrate causality relations between
events.
Ikeda et al. [2] proposed a method for representation of
an event by 5W1H(who, when, where, what, why, how) and
predicate information that are extracted from a news article.
Chin-man et al. [3] proposed a method for acquisition
of detecting knowledge from collection of past news. They
show that analysis of references to the past in news articles
allows us to gain a lot of insight into a historical event.
Murakami et al. [4] proposed a Statement Map showing
the relation of statements described on the Web by creating
a database of knowledge between events using data and a
thesaurus of verbs. This system helps users with selection
and aggregation of information.
In this way, many earlier studies have been conducted to
extract relations between statements to help users. However,
few studies have proposed an event-based comparison with
consideration of the ﬂow across multiple sentences and
statements.
III. EVENT GRAPH MODEL
In this section, we explain the detail of EGM. Because
events takes various granularity, we deﬁne two types of an
event: a minimal event and a composite event.
A. Minimal Event
Minimal events are nodes of a graph in our EGM. A mini-
mal event on a sentence consists of its elements representing
an event; if the elements are divided into two or more parts,
then any of the parts can not represent an event. We deﬁne
two types of an minimal event: an event noun phrase and
EPAS.
1) Event Noun Phrase: An event noun phrase is a noun
phrase which can represent an event by itself. We regard a
noun phrase as event noun phrase if it has a wiki link to
an article of a category related to events. In this work we
use “incident,” “disaster” and “battle” categories. Because a
noun phrase itself does not contain a plenty of information
about the event, we employ a technique for compensating for
such information. It is known that the ﬁrst sentence of the
Wikipedia article of an entity can be regarded as a summary
112
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-248-6
WEB 2013 : The First International Conference on Building and Exploring Web Based Environments

of the entity. Therefore, we extract an EPAS explained in
Section III-A2 from the ﬁrst sentence of the article linked
from the event noun phrase.
2) Event Predicate-Argument Structure: A complex sen-
tence that includes plural predicates is frequently appear
on Japanese Wikipedia articles. Therefore, we should not
regard a sentence as an event. Instead, we focus on a PAS
containing a predicate representing an event in a sentence.
One PAS consists of a predicate and terms that have a case
relation with the predicate. Let p(c1:a2, c2:a2, ... cℓ:aℓ) be
a PAS consists of predicate p and ℓ terms, each ai having
case relation ci with p for i = 1, 2, ..., ℓ.
We extend the PAS in order to represent a minimal event,
because a predicate often corresponds to an action related to
an event. However, not all the predicates correspond to such
actions. Therefore, we propose a rule-based deﬁnition of an
EPAS to use only predicates corresponding to such actions.
The proposed rules are based on Japanese language. We use
a verb or a “sahen noun” as predicates in an EPAS. Here, a
sahen noun is a Japanese-speciﬁc noun that functions as a
verb if it is followed by word “suru”, which is the equivalent
of “do” in English. We explain our four rules (a)-(d) below;
because it is difﬁcult to explain them completely in English,
we only describe the summary of them. (a) We do not use a
verb that represents hearsay and inference. For example, in
sentence “X was said to be serious” of the article for entity
X, “said” is not an action of events in which X took part
in. (b) We do not use an auxiliary verb. For example, in
sentence “He was made to win,” “win” would be preferable
for representing an action to “made.” (c) We use a sahen
noun if it is followed by a punctuation. In Japanese, such a
representation is considered as an omission of word “suru”
explained above. (d) We use a sahen noun if it is a part of an
adverbial clause. For example, in adverbial clause “by the
attack of enemy,” noun “attack” is an action of the enemy.
Our rules, especially (c) and (d), reﬂect characteristics
of Japanese Wikipedia articles. A single sentence in them
frequently contains a larger amount of information than that
contained in a sentence in usual documents. Therefore, it
frequently has omissions of “suru” explained in (c) and
adverbial clauses explained in (d). Although our rules use
Japanese-speciﬁc sahen nouns, we might be able to propose
equivalent rules for English Wikipedia articles by utilizing
well-known characteristics of English grammars.
Once we determine whether we use predicate p in a given
sentence, then we determine the other elements in the EPAS
which contains p. We use only two kinds of a case relation,
nominative and accusative, because these are necessary and
sufﬁcient for determining whether two minimal events have
a relation corresponding to an edge in our EGM. We also
decide to use keywords which are nouns complement of
the predicate but are not nominative and accusative. The
keywords help us to compare and determine the connection
of minimal events. Therefore, we denote an EPAS containing
Table I
EXAMPLES OF A PREDICATE STRUCTURE OF EVENTS.
Predicate
Nominative
Accusative
Keyword
get
ﬁnance
damage
-
reform
Date Muratoki
feudal
-
revive
Date Muratoki
economy
feudal
predicate p by
p(nominative:an, accusative:aa, keywords:k1, k2, ...) ,
where word an is the nominative of the predicate p, and
word aa is the accusative of p, and words k1, k2, ... are
the keywords. The nominative and accusative words can
be extracted from a given sentence by using morphological
analysis tools such as MeCab [7] and CaboCha [8].At the
same time, keywords can be detected. Table I depicts an
example of EPASs corresponding to three minimal events
illustrated in Figure 2.
B. Composite Event
A composite event represents a large event in a given
article by a graph whose node corresponds to a minimal
event and edge represents the relation between two minimal
events. As illustrated in Figure 2, a composite event can be
represented by a connected subgraph. Every edge has a label
representing a kind of the corresponding relation. A causal
relation exists between minimal events “Great Famine of
Kyoho” and “ﬁnances damaged” in the Figure.
1) Relation between Minimal Events: There are studies
about discourse structure analysis used to examine the rela-
tion between a sentence and another sentence [6]. Various
kinds of relations are deﬁned in each study. However,
these kinds of relations are not sufﬁcient for represent the
relations between minimal events which might have smaller
granularity than a sentence, that is, which can be appear
more than twice in a single sentence. Therefore, we extend
ideas used in the discourse structure analysis in order to
capture the relations between minimal events.
We decide to use eight kinds of relations which are
classiﬁed into three categories: deployment, illustration and
parataxis in structural relation category; causality, progress,
and paradox in semantic relation category; means and situa-
tion in complementary relation category. Structural relations
are those necessary to capture the structure of a document.
Wikipedia articles about historical ﬁgures often describe
actions of a person in chronological order. Therefore, these
relations are important to compare the chronological struc-
tures of events. We consider that the causality, progress, and
paradox of events are interpretation of history by human
subjective. Therefore, semantic relations would be the most
important kind of relations for our motivation. A comple-
mentary relation is a particular relation between minimal
113
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-248-6
WEB 2013 : The First International Conference on Building and Exploring Web Based Environments

events in the same sentence; one event gives complementary
information about the other.
2) Determination of Unity between Minimal Events: We
here summarize our idea for determining which minimal
events have a relation by utilizing centering theory proposed
by Grosz [5]. The centering theory can be used for extracting
the relation between adjacent sentences. Umezawa et al. [6]
proposed a system named DIA that performs discourse
structure analysis extend the centering theory so that not
only the adjacent sentences but also neighbor sentences are
used. We apply this extended centering theory to extraction
of the relation between minimal events.
The centering theory uses the nominative words and ac-
cusative words mainly in sentences to determine the relation
between them. Therefore, we can apply it to determine
the relation between two minimal events, each of them is
represented by an EPAS which includes nominative and
accusative words. The extended centering theory assigns
a score representing how much the probability there is a
relation between the pair. If the nominative words of the
events in a pair are the same, then the highest score is
assigned. On the other hand, if there is no common words
in them, the score is lowest. In addition to the scoring used
in the extended centering theory, we assign a high score to
the pair of minimal events extracted in the same sentence
because they would have a relation with a high probability.
We omit the details for space.
IV. EVALUATION
A. Selection of predicate
In order to make sure the effects of our rules deﬁned in
Section 3 that select verbs and sahen nouns as predicates,
we apply the rules to 5 Wikipedia articles about historical
Japanese people including “Date Muratoki” and “Takeda
Motoshige.” Table II shows the ratio of predicates excluded
by our rules. The “Precision” column indicates the ratio
of predicates which are not EPASs actually to the ones
excluded by our rules. The “Recall” column indicates the
ratio of ones which are not EPASs and are excluded by
the rules correctly to all the verbs and sahen nouns. Most of
the predicates excluded by our rules are actually not EPASs.
Therefore, our rules effective in precision. On the other hand,
the recall is not high sufﬁciently. We consider that rules
should be added for proper exclusion.
Table III shows the number of relations extracted by the
extended centering theory (base line) and our method. Our
method can ﬁnd more relation than the baseline.
B. Predicate Search
In order to make sure the beneﬁts of our approach with
event graph model, we compare three simple methods of
search from Wikipedia articles of Japanese people.
Queries of search are composite events that is organized
by two minimal events. We use four queries: (a) He became
Table II
RESULTS OF APPLING OUR RULES OF PREDICATES.
Predicate
Excluded predicates
precision
recall
example
Verbs
3.7 %
87.5 %
36.8 %
said
estimated
Sahen
nouns
80.7 %
98.6 %
89 %
attack
recovery
Table III
THE NUMBER OF RELATIONS BETWEEN MINIMAL EVENTS.
Article Name
Minimal events
Base line
Our method
Date Muratoki
46
40
43
Nasu Takasuke
56
27
32
Takeda Motoshige
68
46
60
Table IV
PRECISION OF PREDICATE SEARCH BY EACH METHODS.
Query Name
Baseline
Use edge
Use edge and label
a
66.7 %
100 %
100 %
b
20 %
95.2 %
100 %
c
37.5 %
100 %
-
d
2.4 %
100 %
100 %
Table V
RECALL OF PREDICATE SEARCH BY EACH METHODS.
Query Name
Use edge
Use edge and label
a
40 %
40 %
b
66.7 %
43.3 %
c
66.7 %
-
a priest and renamed; (b) He succeed to a house because
of retirement of his father; (c) He is helped to the lord,
and returned to secular life; (d) He killed his men and
he lost trust. We use three simple methods for search of
these queries: AND search of two predicates; search with
the information of predicates and the edge of the predicates
in our event graph model; search with the information
of predicates, the edge and its label in our event graph
model. For this experiment, we use 500 Wikipedia articles
of Japanese feudal lords. We also use the Japanese Wordnet
[9] for comparison of two predicates.
Table IV, V shows the precision and recall of these
methods. Because there is not result on query (c) by use
edge and label, there is a blank column in tables. In Table
V, because query (d) has an only 1 correct article, the line
of query (d) is omitted.
Table IV shows there are many noisy results in baseline
method because two predicates are not always related in
articles. On the other hand, our methods show high scores
in precision. It means our method is effective in getting
knowledge of composite events.
However, Table V shows the methods show low scores in
recall. In most cases, it is caused by different written forms,
illegal connection of minimal events and labels. In addition,
114
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-248-6
WEB 2013 : The First International Conference on Building and Exploring Web Based Environments

there is a case that some minimal events exist between two
minimal events of query. To resolve these problems, the
method of comparison of graph models is needed.
V. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
We proposed an event graph model in order to organize
collective knowledge of history and ﬁnd useful knowledge
from it. Focusing on the granularity and relation between
events especially, we proposed a minimal event and a
composite event which represents relations among minimal
events. We actually found minimal events and determined
whether each pair of minimal events has a relation using
Wikipedia articles about people.
A candidate of future work is to propose a method for
determining the kind of the relation of minimal events. We
also plan to construct a method for comparing composite
events by varying the granularity. We consider that graph
theory, including graph isomorphism and topological minor,
would be useful for our plan.
REFERENCES
[1] Hiroshi Ishii, Qiang Ma, and Masatoshi Yoshikawa. Incre-
mental Construction of Causal Network from News Articles,
Journal of Information Processing, Vol. 20, No.1, pp. 207-
215, 2012 [accessed December, 2012]
[2] Takahiro Ikeda, Akitoshi Okumura, and Kazunori Muraki.
Information Classiﬁcation and Navigation Based on 5W1H
of the Target Information, Computational Linguistics and the
Association for Computational Linguistics 1998, Montreal,
pp. 571-577, 1998 [accessed December, 2012]
[3] Ching-man Au Yeung and Adam Jatowt. Studying how
the past is remembered: towards computational history
through large scale text mining, Conference on Information
and Knowledge Management Proc. of the 20th, Glasgow,
pp.1231-1240, 2011 [accessed December, 2012]
[4] Koji Murakami, Eric Nichols, Junta Mizuno, Yotaro Watan-
abe, Shouko Masuda, Hayato Goto, Megumi Ohki, Chitose
Sao, Suguru Matsuyoshi, Kentaro Inui, and Yuji Matsumoto.
Statement map: reducing web information credibility noise
through opinion classiﬁcation, Analytics for Noisy Unstruc-
tured Text Data 2010, Toronto, pp. 59-66, 2010 [accessed
December, 2012]
[5] Barbara J Grosz, Scott Weinstein, and Aravind K Joshi.
Centering: A Framework for Modeling the Local Coherence
of Discourse, Association for Computational Linguistics, 21,
Cambridge, Massachusetts, pp. 203-225, 1995 [accessed De-
cember, 2012]
[6] Toshiyuki Umezawa and Minoru Harada. Discourse Structure
Analysis System DIA Based on Centering Theory and Object
Knowledge, Journal of Natural Language Processing 18(1),
pp. 31-56, 2011 [accessed August, 2011]
[7] MeCab: Yet Another Part-of-Speech and Morphological
Analyzer, http://mecab.sourceforge.net/ [accessed December,
2011]
[8] CaboCha: Yet Another Japanese Dependency Structure An-
alyzer, http://code.google.com/p/cabocha/ [accessed October,
2012]
[9] Japanese Wordnet (v1.1) (c) NICT, 2009-2010,
http://nopwww.nict.go.jp/wn-ja/index.en.html [accessed De-
cember, 2012]
115
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-248-6
WEB 2013 : The First International Conference on Building and Exploring Web Based Environments

