Value Annotation of Web Resources: the ValueML Language 
Massimo Romanin, Elio Toppano 
Dipartimento di Scienze Matematiche, Informatiche e Fisiche (DMIF)  
Università di Udine,  
Udine, Italy 
e-mail: elio.toppano@uniud.it 
 
 
Abstract—In the multimedia design field, we have recently 
witnessed a shift of focus from products and the user' s 
experience to social effects of technologies and the quality of 
life. In this context, values play an important role. They may be 
inscribed within an artifact as symbolic meanings or as a built-
in use consequence. In spite of their growing relevance, there is 
not yet a markup language for value annotation. This paper 
describes a proposal for filling this gap. After a brief review of 
various perspectives on the concept of value and relevant 
taxonomies, we discuss the syntax and semantics of a 
preliminary version of the ValueML language together with an 
example of annotation of a commercial video clip. 
Keywords-value; 
annotation; 
semantic 
web; 
markup 
languages. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
In spite of the growing relevance of values in information 
technology [1], computer systems [2] [3], human computer 
interaction [4], multimedia, and game design [5] [6], there is 
still no common interchange language for the analysis and 
annotation of web resources that deal with this kind of 
abstract constructs. This paper describes a proposal for 
filling this gap.  
The need for value annotation of communicative artifacts 
is present in several application domains. In the fields of 
Marketing and Brand Communication, for instance, values 
constitute an important component of web sites, commercial 
videos and advergames. They may refer to the advertised 
product or service (i.e., a value proposition) or, more 
generally, to a company's brand identity (i.e., the brand core 
values) and brand world (i.e., the brand world ethos). 
Political parties, religious communities, as well as social 
activists focus on values as one of the fundamental content 
and theme of their messages in designing web sites and 
blogs. Sometimes, values are explicitly communicated. 
L'Oreal, for example, started out its campaign "Beauty for 
all" by explaining the deep values (e.g., passion, innovation, 
entrepeneurial spirit, open-mindedness, excellence, and 
responsibility) that were at the base of its messages with an 
explicit document published on the web [7]. Most often, 
values are implicitly inscribed within digital discourses - 
namely, written texts, visual advertisements, commercial 
videos, web sites, games - by an appropriate selection and 
composition of content (e.g., denotative, connotative, and 
narrative meanings) and expression (e.g., plastic features of 
visual and auditory signs). The project Values at Play (VAP), 
for example, is an initiative aimed at investigating the role of 
social, moral, and political values in digital games [8]. It 
builds on the premise that games, like other computer and 
information 
systems, 
may 
embody 
values 
in 
their 
architecture, interaction paradigms, and mechanics. In the 
same vein, Value Sensitive Design [9], Value Centered 
Design [10], Design for Subjective Well-Being [11], and 
Design for Sustainability [12] explore conceptualizations and 
methods for facilitating values conscious design, while 
Generative Semiotics studies values in narrative products 
[13]. In addition, values are an important component of 
cultures. Therefore, independently of explicit design 
intentions, 
values 
are 
inevitably 
inscribed 
within 
communicative artifacts as a reflection of the culture of their 
clients, designers and developers (Culture in Design). 
Alternatively, communicative artifacts can be intentionally 
designed to adapt to the culture of target users (Design for 
Culture).  This is at the base of the localization of web 
resources, a challenging issue addressed by several 
approaches in the field of cross-cultural design. In all the 
above cases, it seems important to be able: i) to identify the 
values that are embedded in products (Which values?); ii) to 
associate values with design choices (How values are 
communicated?), and iii) to explicate the goals and 
intentions that are at the base of the selection of those 
particular values and their expression in the considered 
artifact (Why?). The annotation of a communicative artifact 
with its inscribed values could be exploited for several tasks 
ranging from resource filtering and retrieval, to content 
repurposing or reuse. Notice that assuming that computer 
systems and web resources express or embody values means 
assuming that they are not morally neutral and that it is 
possible to identify tendencies in them to promote or demote 
particular moral values, and norms [14]. Such tendencies are 
embedded in the sense that they can be identified and studied 
largely or wholly independently of actual uses of the artifact, 
although they manifest themselves in a variety of uses of the 
system (not necessarily in all uses!). 
The paper is organized as follows. In Section II we 
discuss the concept of value from different perspectives and 
we illustrate available taxonomies and vocabularies of 
values. Next, in Section III we state the scope and the aim of 
the study by focusing on the values that are inscribed within 
an artifact during its development stage. The main 
requirements of a language for value annotation are then 
introduced in Section IV together with a possible solution, 
i.e., the ValueML. A simple example of analysis and 
annotation of a video commercial using the proposed 
language is presented in Section V to show the effectiveness 
32
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-636-1
WEB 2018 : The Sixth International Conference on Building and Exploring Web Based Environments

of the approach. Finally, in Section VI some conclusions are 
reported. 
II. 
STATE OF THE ART 
A. The concept of value 
The concept of value has several meanings according to 
the specific perspective from which it is considered [1] [15] 
[16] [17]. Looking at existing literature, the term "value" is 
interpreted as:  
- an enduring belief that a specific mode of conduct or 
end-state of existence is personally or socially preferable to 
an opposite or converse mode of conduct or end state of 
existence (i.e., value as enduring belief system); 
- the monetary sacrifice people are willing to make for a 
product (i.e., value as exchange); 
- the utility of the physical properties of the product, 
which is realized only upon its use (i.e., value as perceived 
utility); 
- an indicator of how much one desires a product or fears 
of loosing it (i.e., value as attachment); 
- sign or meaning, e.g., an index of social status, lifestyle, 
modernity (i.e., value as meaning); 
- an indicator of how the interaction with a product is 
aesthetically, cognitively or affectively worth to be made 
(i.e., value as good experience). 
In addition, there is the need to disambiguate among 
different concepts that are in some way correlated such as 
values, needs, desires, preferences, and goals (see for 
example [1]). For some scholars values are abstract, 
desirable trans-situational goals; for others they are relatively 
stable individual preferences that reflect socialization; yet 
others consider values as cognitive representation of needs. 
In his Value Theory [17], Schwartz, defines values as 
"desirable, trans-situational goals, varying in importance, 
that serve as guiding principles in people's lives". Most 
importantly, he identifies five main features of the 
conception of value that are implicit in the works of many 
theorists and researchers: 
- values are beliefs tied inextricably to emotions; 
- values are a motivational construct. They refer to 
desirable goals people strive to attain; 
- values transcend specific actions and situations; 
- values serve as standards or criteria to guide selection or 
evaluation of action, policies, people or events; 
- values are ordered by importance relative to one 
another. 
We argue that a clear understanding of the meaning of 
value is an important step toward the development of a value 
ontology for applications in the Semantic Web field. 
B. Value taxonomies 
Several efforts have been made, in the past, to classify 
values and propose appropriate (with respect to specific 
criteria) value taxonomies. Schwartz, for instance, proposed 
a set of ten basic values each one described in terms of its 
motivational goal. They are: self-direction, stimulation, 
hedonism, 
achievement, 
power, 
security, 
conformity, 
tradition, benevolence, and universalism [17]. These values 
are structured on a circular pattern where congruent values 
(e.g., achievement and power) are located on adjacent 
positions while conflicting values (e.g., achievement and 
benevolence) on opposite sides. Boztepe, focusing on user's 
values, proposed a classification including nineteen different 
values clustered into four main categories namely, utility, 
social significance, emotional, and spiritual [15]. Value 
Sensitive Design focuses on values in computer systems 
such as privacy, freedom from bias, informed consent, 
accountability, property rights, to name only a few [9]. 
Specific taxonomies have been proposed in marketing [18] 
and in game design [8]. Floch, for example, distinguishes 
four types of product values - namely, practical, critical, 
utopian, and ludic values - that are at the base of the main 
marketing strategies. Friedman et al. [9] uses a set of 
seventeen values  (e.g., diversity, justice, inclusion, equality, 
environmentalism, creativity, trust, etc.) for the analysis and 
design of digital games. Recent research in Positive Design 
focuses on hedonic values (e.g., pleasure) and eudaimonia 
(e.g., personal flourishing) [11]. What emerges from the 
comparison of current literature is that available proposals 
are very different in terms of: i) number of values 
considered; ii) level of generality; iii) granularity of proposed 
distinctions, iv) types of values considered, and v) terms 
used to denote the values. Some values (e.g., autonomy, self 
actualization) are common to various approaches while 
others (e.g., informed consent, humor) are present only in 
some 
vocabularies. 
Some 
vocabularies 
are 
more 
heterogeneous than others merging general and specific 
values or values having different nature such as hedonic 
values (e.g., pleasure) with ethical (e.g., morality, virtue), 
political (e.g., justice), and cultural values (e.g., life quality, 
happiness). Moreover, not all approaches accurately define 
the concepts represented by their vocabularies; so there are 
ambiguities (i.e., multiple interpretations of values) and 
"semantic confusion" within and across vocabularies. What 
is needed is a conceptualization that integrates existing 
proposals (or part of them) into a coherent and 
comprehensive framework that could be used as a guiding 
framework for media content annotation. An interesting step 
toward this goal is the work by Brey reported in [5]. The 
author illustrates an articulation of axiology that provides 
structure and overview to relevant values belonging to 
traditional theories (e.g., ethics, aesthetics, and politics) 
including cultural values of Theories of Good applied to new 
media. 
III. 
SCOPE AND AIM OF THE STUDY 
A. The values inscribed within a product 
Our study is intended to focus on values that are 
(intentionally 
or 
unintentionally) 
inscribed 
within 
a 
communicative 
artifact 
during 
design 
and 
system 
implementation. We call these values the "Values in the 
product" to distinguish them from other kinds of values such 
as, for example, the values of the stakeholders (e.g., the 
client's, designer's or user's internal conceptions of what is 
worth/important in life), the economic value of the product 
(i.e., its exchange value), or the value of the product as 
33
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-636-1
WEB 2018 : The Sixth International Conference on Building and Exploring Web Based Environments

experienced by a user during its use (i.e., the perceived use 
value). The latter two interpretations - namely the exchange 
and perceived use values - can be referred to as the "Value of 
the product". The values inscribed in a product are strictly 
connected to the choices taken by designers and developers 
during production since these decisions are made on the base 
of criteria that are usually value-laden. For communicative 
artifacts, these choices may refer to several aspects such as, 
for example, i) the adopted conceptual model or meta-model 
of the artifact; ii) the articulation of content meaning; iii) 
meaning presentation or expression, and iv) technology. 
Here are some examples. The adoption of the Semantic 
Markup for Web Services (OWL-S) instead of the Web 
Service Modeling Ontology (WSMO) reflects different 
values and has different ethical implications as discussed in 
[19]. In a narrative commercial clip, ethical or moral values 
can be inscribed in the story (content) or expression (e.g., 
aesthetic values); in a digital game they can be embodied in 
game mechanics (i.e., in game rules), game dynamics or 
experience 
(i.e., 
hedonic 
pleasure). 
In 
Persuasive 
Technologies [20], Design for Sustainable Behavior [12], 
and in applications inspired to Nudge Theory [21], values are 
directly related to the intended behavior or state we want to 
be enabled, induced or fostered in users. According to the 
above discussion, we can distinguish the following two main 
cases: 
- an artifact may have embedded values understood as 
special kind of built-in consequences. This conception (i.e., 
causalist conception of embedded values) relates values to 
causal capacities of an artifact to affect the environment. In 
other words, the artifact use causes a state of the world that 
realizes some kind of value;  
- an artifact may be expressive of values (i.e., expressive 
conception of embedded values) in that it contains symbolic 
meanings that refer to values. These values may represent the 
values of designers, clients or users. This does not imply that 
it also functions to realize these values. It is conceivable that 
the values expressed in artifacts cause people to adopt these 
values and thus contribute to their realization. Whether this 
happens or not remains an open question. 
B. The problem addressed: value annotation 
Generally speaking, value taxonomies and vocabularies 
can be exploited in three different use cases: 
- manual annotation of multimodal resources with 
inscribed values;  
- automatic value detection and classification. The goal, 
here, is to model the means/ends relationships existing 
between measurable features of multimodal artifacts and 
abstract constructs such as value concepts;  
- value generation, that is, simulation of specific values 
by an appropriate selection and composition of multimedia 
content and expression. 
Our study focuses on the first use case. The problem we 
intend to address is thus the following: to design a general-
purpose language for the manual annotation of values 
inscribed within a multimodal resource. The language should 
let the annotator to define the scope of a value annotation 
and to describe the value itself by referring to a specific and 
shared vocabulary. We envisage several possible ways in 
which the annotation could be used including: 
- retrieval and selection/filtering of resources or part of 
them on the base of intended embodied values. It may be 
possible, for example, to annotate specific fragments of a 
multimodal resource with intended values and then retrieve 
the fragments using the values as key words; 
- reuse a resource for new goals or contexts (i.e., 
repurposing). The identification and value annotation of 
multimodal fragments enables a designer to reuse the content 
of the fragment for new goals/objectives or in new 
communication contexts; 
- exploitation of design knowledge embodied within an 
artifact for new products. Linking values to fragments is a 
way to explicitly represent how values are communicated in 
that artifact. This knowledge is design knowledge that may 
be used as inspirational for innovative products and design 
solutions; 
- construction of a shared data base of value annotation 
resources that can be used as a ground base or training set for 
automatic recognition of values or for scientific research. 
IV. 
THE VALUEML 
The following is an initial unstructured list of 
requirements for the development of a language for value 
annotation. They are based on an understanding of the needs 
arising from concrete scenarios of manual annotation of 
multimodal texts. The desired language should allow the 
annotator to represent: 
- the intended values a designer/author wants to be 
embodied in the multimodal resource under development. 
The focus is thus on annotation during the design and the 
development of the communication message rather than 
during its final use. This is not to deny that annotations made 
by the users are important. Simply, social tagging comes 
after the product has been developed and published and has 
different goals. It may be used, for example, to assess the 
effectiveness of intended value communication; 
- values that have been expressed by different semiotic 
modalities (e.g., written texts, static and dynamic images, 
sound objects) and dispersed across content (e.g., narratives, 
denotative and connotative meanings) and expression (e.g., 
plastic features). As an example, brand values and brand 
ethos could be communicated by a story while aesthetic 
values by the product look and feel; 
- non-economic values. We are interested in moral, 
ethical, political, aesthetic, and cultural values rather than the 
economic value of the product; 
- values that belong to different taxonomies. The 
language should be sufficiently flexible so that the annotator 
is not constrained to use a specific vocabulary but can select 
among a set of available vocabularies the one that better 
satisfies his/her goals in the design situation at hand. The 
design of the language must be modular so that the 
appropriate vocabulary of descriptors for the target use can 
be chosen; 
- values at different aggregation levels. In other words, it 
should be possible annotate the entire resource, as well as 
specific fragments or parts of it. Moreover, it should be 
34
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-636-1
WEB 2018 : The Sixth International Conference on Building and Exploring Web Based Environments

possible to trace the time course of values in dynamic 
products such as audio-visuals; 
- values associated to specific components in narrative 
texts. For example, it should be possible to associate specific 
values to the characters of a narrative told by a video and 
track the evolution of these values during story events. 
Alternatively, it should be possible to associate a value to the 
events of the story, or the consequences of these events; 
- the relevance of an intended value with respect to other 
values inscribed within the same product and a measure of 
confidence in the attribution of that value to that fragment 
(i.e., a confidence of annotation accuracy); 
- complex values i.e., combination of simple values 
occurring simultaneously in a particular segment of a 
resource; 
- how a value is communicated in the product that is the 
modality (e.g., by expressive or narrative features); 
The following section describes the main features of a 
draft language proposal intended to satisfy most of the above 
design requirements. 
A. Language syntax and semantic 
ValueML uses a XML-based syntax. Structurally, 
ValueML uses elements and attribute names to indicate the 
type of information being represented; attribute values 
provide actual information. The proposed language adheres 
to the following syntactic principles: 
- the value annotation is self-contained within a 'value' 
element; 
- all values belong to a specific controlled vocabulary; 
- the annotating data is a value label; it is explicit from 
which vocabulary the value label is chosen. We draw on 
existing literature to propose a set of value categories; 
- the link to the annotated material (i.e., the target) is 
realized by a reference using a URI and the reference has an 
explicit role. Two roles have being proposed namely: 
'expressedBy' and 'signifiedBy'; 
- the modality of value expression or signification is 
specified, e.g., by storyline content, sound objects or visual 
plastic features; 
- the target of annotation (scope) may be a block of text, 
an image or part of it, a segment of an audio or video asset, a 
node of a XML document (e.g., a SMIL presentation); 
- a set of contextual elements can be used to describe the 
type of resource, its name, its web URL, etc. 
V. 
CASE STUDY 
We illustrate an example of annotation of a specific 
multimodal resource: a commercial clip. The aim is to assess 
the feasibility of value annotation with ValueML in a 
concrete case.  
A. A test bed: the Citroen BX ad campaign 
The clip selected for the analysis and annotation 
represents a well known ad campaign by Citroen [22]. It was 
produced in 1982 to advertise the BX model. Our choice is 
motivated by the availability of original script and critical 
essays about the considered video that provide the main 
source of annotation knowledge [18].  
Annotation is preceded by an analysis of the clip that is 
driven by a semiotic meta-model of the video as discussed in 
[23]. The meta-model distinguishes four interrelated levels of 
analysis (Figure 1): i) the textual level representing the 
concrete/physical manifestation of the video content in terms 
of audio-visual features; ii) the discourse level referring to 
thematic, figurative, rhetorical aspects; iii) a shallow 
narrative level describing the story told by the video in terms 
of abstract roles (called actants) and narrative schemas (e.g., 
the narrative canonical schema), and, iv) a deep narrative 
level that uses a specific tool called semiotic square to 
articulate deep semantic meanings such as narrative values 
(axiology). Signification unfolds by crossing these levels 
from shallow features of the video to the most abstract and 
deep ones. 
 
 
 
Figure 1.  A schematic view of the meta-model used for the analysis  of 
the video commercial.  
At the deep Semio-Narrative level, values have been 
classified according to Floch [18] into four classes namely, 
practical, critical, utopian and ludic values. They represent 
the vertices of a semiotic square. Practical values refer to 
utility, 
usefulness; 
critical 
values 
to 
convenience, 
performance, quality; utopian values to identity, reflection, 
social relations, and ludic values to surprise, madness, 
astonishment, irony and pleasure including aesthetic 
pleasure. The selection of specific values in the construction 
of a story allows the author to realize specific marketing 
strategies. In the considered video clip, values are 
communicated as follows: 
- the first segment of the video (time interval: [0 s, 33 s], 
14 shots) represents practical values (see Figure 2). A red car 
leaves Paris at midnight (Minuit, Paris ...) under the rain. 
After 8 hours it gets to the sea (.. 8 heures, la mer). The car is 
presented as a safe, confortable, and quick mean to escape 
from the everyday city life. Onboard a young lady, takes off 
her hat, smiling. An off screen voice (by Julien Clerc) sings: 
"J'aime, J'aime, J'aime"; 
- a following segment (time interval: [34 s, 40 s], 3 shots) 
is used to communicate ludic values (see Figure 3). The car 
suddenly dives in the sea without it could be possible to 
attribute this mad action to the driver that is never shown. 
The plunge, unexpected and irrational, represents the 
negation of practical values shown in the previous segment; 
35
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-636-1
WEB 2018 : The Sixth International Conference on Building and Exploring Web Based Environments

 
 
Figure 2.  Four key frames of the first segment of the video clip 
representing practical values. 
 
Figure 3.  Two key frames of the second segment of the video clip 
representing ludic values. 
 
Figure 4.  A key frame of the final segment of the video clip representing 
utopian values. 
- a final segment (time interval: [41 s, 47 s], one shot) 
represents utopian values (see Figure 4). Here, the car 
(Citroen BX) is no more an instrument, it is a subject, it lives 
(Citroen BX. Elle vit.). 
Figure 5 shows the semiotic square with the trajectory of 
values expressed by the Citroen BX clip during presentation. 
Practical and ludic values are communicated through the 
visual track, while the utopian valorization is explicitly 
expressed by a voice over. 
 
 
Figure 5.  Semiotic square of consumer values 
B. Value annotation 
Figure 6 shows a simple example of annotation of the 
considered video clip using the ValueML. 
 
 
Figure 6.  Annotation of the video clip with ValueML. 
The attribute 'vocabulary' specifies the set of values that 
are used for the annotation, i.e., the Floch's classification. 
Within the 'info' element various metadata are present to 
describe several contextual information such as resource 
type, name, and description. Value annotation starts with the 
'value' element. 'Relevance' and 'confidence' are specified by 
a continuous unitless scale such as [0,1]. The expression of a 
value may be masked by another one, it may be inhibited, 
minimized or even exaggerated. Therefore, the human 
annotator needs to indicate the degree of importance and 
confidence that a certain attribution is correct. The 'role' and 
'uri' attributes within the 'reference' element are used to 
associate values to video segments and to describe the type 
36
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-636-1
WEB 2018 : The Sixth International Conference on Building and Exploring Web Based Environments

of relationship existing between annotated and annotating 
data. The 'modality' attribute specifies the features of the 
video that are charged with value meaning thus realizing a 
means/ends chain.  
VI. 
CONCLUSIONS 
To our knowledge, this is the first attempt to propose a 
language for value annotation of web resources. Analogous 
projects exist in the field of Affective Computing and 
Sentiment Analysis [24]. We refer, in particular, to the recent 
W3C initiative of EmotionML for the annotation of 
expressed emotions [25]. ValueML is inspired to such an 
effort; it may be seen as a complementary resource for 
describing experiential and socio-cultural aspects of artifacts. 
Current experiments have confirmed the feasibility of the 
approach and the effectiveness of this preliminary version of 
the language. However, more analyses are required, before 
addressing formalization, in order to identify limitations and 
possible improvements. As multimedia designers, we expect 
to gain knowledge about how values can be, and are actually 
embodied in artifacts. A goal is, for example, to better 
understand the relationship existing between the axiological 
level and the narrative one. Which kind of properties should 
be possessed by the main components of a narrative (e.g., 
space, time, characters, relationships, passions, events) in 
order to effectively communicate a given set of values? This 
knowledge could be used to enrich the domain of possible 
values associated to the 'modality' attribute. Another open 
issue regards the specification of scales. Should they be 
continuous or discrete, unipolar or bipolar, etc. We have 
postponed a more detailed specification of scales after the 
acquisition of more knowledge. The final step will be the 
design and implementation of an ontology to define the 
terms of the ValueML language, to relate the terms to one 
another, and to define mappings between value vocabularies 
when possible. 
REFERENCES  
[1] S. Kujala and K. V.V.Mattila, "Value of Information Systems 
and Products: Understanding the Users' Perspective and 
Values," Journal of Information Technology Theory and 
Application, 9:4, pp. 23-39, 2009. 
[2] B. Friedman and H. Nissembaum, "Bias in computer 
systems," ACM Trans. on Information Systems, Vol. 14, No. 
3, pp. 330-347, 1996. 
[3] B. D. Mittelstadt, P. Allo, M. Taddeo, S. Wachter, and L. 
Floridi, "The ethics of algorithms: mapping the debate," Big 
Data & Society, July-December, Sage, pp. 1-21, 2016. 
[4] B. Friedman and P. H. Kahn, "Human values, Ethics, and 
Design, " in Handbook of Human-Computer Interaction, J. 
Jacko, A. Sears, and N.J. Mahwah, Editors, Lawrence 
Erlbaum, pp. 1177-1201, 2003.! 
[5] P. Brey, "Theorizing the cultural quality of new media," 
Technè, 11:1, Fall 2007, pp. 2-18. URL: 
http://scholar.lib.vt.edu/ejournals/SPT/v11n1/brey.html 
[retrieved: April, 2018]. 
[6] M. Flanagan, J. Belman, H. Nissenbaum, and J. Diamond, "A 
method for discovering values in digital games," Proc. 
DiGRA Conference, pp. 752-760, 2007. 
[7] L'Oreal Web Site URL: http://www.loreal.com/group/who-
we-are/our-values-and-ethical-principles 
[retrieved: 
April, 
2018]. 
[8] J. Belman, H. Nissenbaum, M. Flanagan, and J. Diamond, 
"Grow-A-Game: a tool for values conscious design and 
analysis of digital games," Proc. of DiGRA Conference, Vol. 
6, pp. 14-17, 2011. 
[9] B. Friedman, P. H. Kahn, A. Borning, and A. Huldtgren, 
"Value sensitive design and information systems," in Early 
engagement and new technologies: opening up the laboratory, 
pp. 55-95, Springer, Netherlands, 2013. 
[10] G. Cockton, "A development framework for value-centered 
design," Proc. CHI EA '05, pp. 1292-1295, 2005. 
[11] P. M. A. Desmet and A. E. Pohlmeyer, "Positive Design: an 
introduction 
to 
Design 
for 
Subjective 
Well-Being," 
International Journal of Design, Vol. 7, No. 3, pp. 5-19, 2013. 
[12] F. Ceschin and I. Gaziulusoy, "Evolution of design for 
sustainability: from product design to design for system 
innovation and transition," Design Studies, 47, pp. 118-163, 
2016. 
[13] C. Bianchi, "Semiotic approaches to advertising texts and 
strategies: narrative, passion, marketing," Semiotica 183, 1/4, 
pp. 243-271, 2011. 
[14] P. Brey, "Values in technology and disclosive computer 
ethics," The Cambridge Handbook of Information and 
Computer Ethics, Ed. L. Floridi, Cambridge University Press, 
pp. 41-58, 2009. 
[15] S. Boztepe, "User Value: competing theories and models," 
International Journal of Design, Vol. 1, No.2, pp. 55-63, 
2007. 
[16] C. A. Le Dantec, E. S. Poole, and S. P. Wyche, "Values as 
lived experiences: evolving Value Sensitive Design in support 
of value discovery," Proc. CHI 2009, ACM, pp. 1141-1150, 
2009. 
[17] S. H. Schwartz, "An Overview of the Schwartz theory of 
Basic Values," Online Readings in Psychology and Culture, 
2(1), Article 11, 2012,  https://doi.org/10.9707/2307-
0919.1116 
[18] J. M. Floch, Semiotics, Marketing and Communication: 
beneath the signs, the strategies. Palgrave MacMillan, 2001. 
[19] L. Anticoli and E. Toppano, "Technological mediation of 
ontologies: the need for tools to help designers in 
materializing ethics," International Journal of Philosophy 
Study, Vol. 1, Issue 3, pp. 23-31, 2013. 
[20] B. Fogg. Persuasive Technology: Using Computers to Change 
What We Think and Do. Morgan Kaufmann, San Francisco, 
2003. 
[21] R. H. Thaler and C. S. Sunstein. NUDGE. Improving 
decisions about health, wealth, and happiness, Yale 
University Press, 2008. 
[22] Citroen Bx Campaign, YouTube, URL: 
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=jH2HLRpIq2Y 
[retrieved: April, 2018]. 
[23] E. Toppano and V. Roberto, "Semiotic annotation of narrative 
video commercials: bridging the gap between artifacts and 
ontologies," International Journal on Advances in Internet 
Technology, vol. 10, nr. 3&4, pp. 145-162, IARIA, 2017, 
http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/ [retrieved: 
April, 2018]. 
[24] E. Cambria, "Affective Computing and Sentiment Analysis," 
IEEE Intelligent Systems, March/April, pp. 102-107, 2009. 
[25] W3C. Emotion Markup Language (EmotionML), May 2014, 
URL: https://www.w3.org/TR/emotionml/[retrieved: April, 
2018].
 
37
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-636-1
WEB 2018 : The Sixth International Conference on Building and Exploring Web Based Environments

