Interface for Looking Back at TV Dramas on Twitter
Taketoshi Ushiama
Faculty of Design
Kyushu University
Fukuoka, Japan
email: ushiama@design.kyushu-u.ac.jp
Haruka Nagai
School of Design
Kyushu University
Fukuoka, Japan
email: 1ds16408n@s.kyushu-u.ac.jp
Abstract—In recent years, while TV dramas are being broad-
cast, many comments and discussions on the dramas are posted
on Twitter, which are called “live tweets.” After watching a
drama, users can search for live tweets about scenes of interest to
them, enjoy the impressions of other viewers, and deepen their
thinking from a different perspective. However, in the current
Twitter search function, even if the user searches for a keyword
of the target scene, the tweets including the keyword are only
presented in order of time, and it takes time for users to ﬁnd
the live tweets of the scene the user is interested in. This paper
proposes an interface that can efﬁciently look back at dramas
using live tweets by visualizing the similarity distribution of
keywords by time for live tweets posted during the drama based
on keywords entered by the user.
Index Terms—Twitter; social viewing; live tweeting; TV
drama; looking back.
I. INTRODUCTION
In recent years, Social Networking Services (SNS) have
become widespread worldwide. In particular, Twitter can be
considered as one of the most popular SNSs that are used
on a daily basis for a variety of purposes, including the
dissemination of opinions and communication.
In this context, social viewing, where people post live tweets
while watching a TV program, is becoming more and more
popular. Live tweets are tweets posted while watching a TV
program that include real-time reactions to the program, such
as comments and opinions. By posting live tweets, SNS users
can discuss the same programs with other users via Twitter,
just as they normally do with their family and friends while
watching TV programs.
Social viewing is not only fun for users who post live tweets,
but also for users who only view the tweets without posting
them. In this study, we focus on live-tweeting after watching
TV dramas, where viewers may want to know what others
think about a scene that left a strong impression on them or
a scene that they have questions about. In such cases, they
can look at the live tweets of other viewers of the scene and
sympathize with the tweets that have similar opinions, or gain
new knowledge by seeing tweets with a different perspective.
Viewing live tweets can allow viewers to look back at the
content of the drama and enjoy the aftermath of the program
more deeply. However, many live tweets can be posted for
TV programs, and it is necessary to ﬁnd the live tweets for
the desired scene among them. In this paper, we propose a
novel interface for ﬁnding live tweets of TV dramas. The term
“TV drama looking back search” refers to the search for actual
tweets for a speciﬁc scene in order to look back on the content
of a drama after viewing.
In the conventional Twitter search function, live tweets
can be retrieved by using hashtags. Hashtags are tags that
begin with a “#” to classify posts by a speciﬁc topic. Many
live tweets are tagged with the title of the program or its
abbreviation, so people can search by hashtag to see live
tweets posted by other people. However, while this search
function is ideal for viewing real-time tweets about a scene
being broadcast, it poses some problems when viewing past
tweets, such as when wanting to view tweets about an earlier
scene after watching a TV program, or when wanting to record
a TV program after it has aired. There are three problems when
browsing past live tweets.
1) The number of live tweets of TV programs is huge, and
it takes a lot of effort to check each result obtained by
the tweet search function, and to go back to the tweets
of the scene that the user is interested in.
2) The content of live tweets is often very brief. It is
difﬁcult to tell from the tweet alone which scene the
comment is about.
3) One can also narrow down the tweets by searching for
keywords that are characteristic of the target scene along
with the title of the program or abbreviated hashtag,
but only the tweets that match the keywords will be
displayed, so if the keywords are ambiguous, users will
not be able to get the tweets they want.
In this paper, we propose an tweet search interface that
enables efﬁcient looking back at TV dramas to overcome these
problems. This interface helps users to efﬁciently discover live
tweets of interest. The user inputs a tweet of interest, and the
number of live tweets posted related to that keyword in the
drama is visualized as a graph. Using this graph, the user can
efﬁciently discover the time interval related to the interest and
easily access the tweets of the scene the user is interested in.
This paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, the proposed
method is described. Section 3 conclude this paper.
II. PROPOSED METHOD
Live tweets of TV drama programs represent the real-time
responses of users who watched the drama in question and
are considered to strongly reﬂect the content of the scene
being broadcast at that time. Ushijima et al. [1] obtained
the characteristics of scenes in TV dramas by analyzing the
viewer’s responses using live tweets.
1
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-856-3
WEB 2021 : The Ninth International Conference on Building and Exploring Web Based Environments

In this study, we assume that the scenes associated with
the keywords speciﬁed by the user have many live tweets
with high similarity to the keywords. Then, the relevance of
the keyword to the scene is estimated using the content of
the live tweets associated with the scene. Speciﬁcally, the
timeline consisting of live tweets posted during the drama
broadcast time is divided into segments, and the relevance
between segments and keywords is determined based on the
similarity between the tweets and keywords in each segment.
Then, by visualizing the transition of the relevance, users can
easily ﬁnd the segment they are interested in. When a user
speciﬁes a segment of interest, the user can access the tweets
contained in the segment.
The procedure of the method proposed is shown as follows:
1) Collect live tweets about TV drama programs using
Twitter Application Program Interface (Twitter API).
Speciﬁcally, tweets that include the title of TV drama
programs hashtag posted during the broadcast time of
the target TV drama program are collected and stored
in the tweet DB. Retweets and replies are excluded from
the stored tweets.
2) The tweets of the TV drama program speciﬁed by the
user are retrieved from the tweet Database (tweet DB),
and the timeline of the collected tweets is divided into
time segments in order to obtain the characteristics of
the tweets by time. The segmented set of tweets is called
a segment.
3) Perform morphological analysis on the tweets in the
segment.
4) Vectorize the tweets and keywords in the segment.
5) Calculate the cos similarity of the vectors obtained from
the tweets and keywords in the segment and calculate
the similarity between each segment and the keyword.
6) The similarity of each segment is graphed and presented
to the user.
A. Segmentation of the timeline
In the proposed method, we aim to estimate and visualize
the excitement related to keywords for each unit of time
according to the progress of the TV drama program. We divide
the timeline of collected live tweets into segments of a certain
time interval. The set of tweets in the segmented time interval
is called a segment, and each segment is considered to strongly
reﬂect the characteristics of the scene broadcasted at that time.
B. Creating a Word2Vec model
In order to calculate the similarity between a segment and
a keyword, Word2Vec [2] is used to calculate the similarity
between a tweet and a keyword in the segment.
Word2Vec is a word vectorization method that uses a neural
network consisting of two layers for text processing. By
learning the weights of the neural network using a corpus,
a vector representation of words can be obtained.
C. Calculation of similarity
We vectorize the tweets and keywords in a segment and
calculate the similarity of each segment. In order to ﬁnd a
Figure 1. Example of timeline visualization.
better method, we use three methods to calculate and compare
the similarity of each segment. Here, for the vectorization of
tweets, we share the tweets, ﬁnd the vector of each word, and
take the average of them as the vector of tweets.
The tweets and keywords in the segment are vectorized
using the Word2Vec model learned by the above method,
and the cos similarity with the keywords is calculated for
each tweet, and the average is the similarity of the segment.
Equation (1) represents the deﬁnition of the similarity where
q is the vector of keywords, and S is the vector of keywords,
the vector of segments (the set of vectors of tweets), and t
denotes the vector of tweets.
sim(q, Si) = 1
Si
X
t∈S
simt(q, t)
(1)
D. Visualization of similarity by time
In this method, we provided a user interface that visualizes
and displays the obtained similarity of each segment as a
graph. By looking at the graph, the user can ﬁnd out at
which time of the day the scene related to the keyword was
broadcasted, and by pointing the mouse on the graph, the user
can view the live tweets posted at that time. Figure 1 shows
an example of timeline visualization.
III. CONCLUSION
In this paper, we propose an interface that allows users to
efﬁciently view live tweets for a desired scene in order to
review TV dramas. The interface divides the live tweets posted
during the broadcast of a TV drama into segments by time
interval, and calculates the similarity between the tweets and
keywords in each segment to visualize the transition of the
excitement related to the keywords of the drama.
REFERENCES
[1] D. Minami, M. Ushijima and T. Ushiama, “How do viewers react to
drama?: Extraction of scene features of dramas from live commentary
tweets,” IMCOM 2018, pp. 87:1–87:4, 2018.
[2] T. Mikolov, I. Sutskever, K. Chen, G. Corrado and J. Dean, “ Distributed
Representations of Words and Phrases and their Compositionality,” NIPS
2013, pp. 3111–3119, 2013.
2
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-856-3
WEB 2021 : The Ninth International Conference on Building and Exploring Web Based Environments

