A Personalized Scoring Method for Rental Property Search
Considering the Surrounding Environment
Ruman Suyama
Division of Frontier Informatics
Kyoto Sangyo University, Kyoto, Japan
i2286220@cc.kyoto-su.ac.jp
Yukiko Kawai
Faculty of Information Science and Engineering
Kyoto Sangyo University, Kyoto, Japan
kawai@cc.kyoto-su.ac.jp
Da Li
Faculty of Engineering
Fukuoka University, Fukuoka, Japan
lida@fukuoka-u.ac.jp
Shinsuke Nakajima
Faculty of Information Science and Engineering
Kyoto Sangyo University, Kyoto, Japan
nakajima@cc.kyoto-su.ac.jp
Abstract—Nowadays, a growing number of people use real
estate and housing information websites to search for rental
properties. However, it is difficult to specify searching conditions
according to specific individual needs, such as community safety
and barrier-free environment. In this study, we propose a per-
sonalized scoring method that takes into account the surrounding
environment and can appropriately evaluate properties to match
the target user’s age, gender, hobbies, and preferences. We also
conducted a preliminary experiment to compare the ranking
of the proposed method and the baseline methods based on
nDCG@5, we found that the proposed method achieved the best
performance.
Keywords—rental property, recommendation system, personal-
ization, surrounding environment analysis
I. INTRODUCTION
Many users use real estate and housing information websites
to search for rental properties. Conventional real estate and
housing information sites provide users with the services of
searching properties based on criteria, such as rent, size, age,
layout, and the distance from the nearest train station [1].
However, it is difficult to specify search conditions according
to specific individual needs, such as community safety and
accessibility. In the existing studies, Suwa et al. proposed a
method for quantitative and intuitive comparison and evalua-
tion of noise and daylighting using IoT devices [2]. Motomura
et al. proposed a method for searching and ranking rental
properties based on user evaluation features [3]. However,
these approaches did not consider the surrounding environment
of the house and the user characteristics. In this study, we
propose a personalized scoring method for rental properties
based on the consideration of the surrounding environment
that takes into account the family structure including age and
gender, as well as their interests and preferences.
The remainder of this paper is structured as follows. In
Section 2, we introduce the proposed personalized scoring
method for rental properties. Afterward, in Section 3, we
describe the details of the preliminary experiment. Finally, in
Section 4, we conclude this study and discuss future works.
II. PERSONALIZED SCORING METHOD
We introduce the proposed method in this section.
Fig. 1. The overview of the personalized scoring method considering various
preferences.
A. Overview of the Proposed Method
An overview of our proposed method is shown in Figure
1. In the case of a female (who likes karaoke and sweets),
the proposed system can recommend properties based on a
personalized score ranking that takes into account “security,
karaoke, cafe” and other evaluation items considered essential
to the target user among all evaluation items of rental property.
In the case of a couple in their 70s (gateball and chess
enthusiasts), it is possible to create a ranking based on the
personalized score that can recommend barrier-free properties
located near a community center or park.
B. Implementation of Personalized Scoring Method for Rental
Properties
In this study, we are going to address the following four
main issues in order to implement personalized scoring.
• Data Collection
Data on publicly available rental properties, map informa-
tion and reviews of stores and spots (Google Maps), pub-
lic safety information (local governments, SNS), barrier-
free information (Ministry of Land, Infrastructure, Trans-
port and Tourism, SNS), etc. are collected and stored in
the database with location information.
• Detection of important evaluation items based on the
user information
3
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-055-1
WEB 2023 : The Eleventh International Conference on Building and Exploring Web Based Environments

The important evaluation items are determined based on
the target user’s age, gender, tastes, and preferences. Next,
we use the trained Word2Vec model [4] to obtain the
vectors of hobbies and surrounding facilities from the
collected data and calculate the similarity. For instance,
for a 25-year-old female who likes karaoke and sweets,
the important evaluation items are security as the sur-
rounding environment, and distance from karaoke stores
and cafes as surrounding facilities.
• Determination of important evaluation items based on
family structure
In the case of a multigenerational home, we calculate
each important evaluation item of each person. However,
for safety-related evaluation items, such as security and
barrier-free access, we will consider the importance of
the evaluation items instead of the average of them.
• Implementation of Personalized Scoring method
Scores of rental properties are calculated for each of
the above-mentioned critical evaluation items, and the
scores are integrated considering the importance of each
evaluation item.
III. PRELIMINARY EXPERIMENT
We conducted a preliminary experiment to discuss the
effectiveness of the proposed method by comparing the con-
ventional simple ranking with the ranking based on the Per-
sonalized Scoring method (proposed method).
A. Experimental Details
• Target Rental Property Data
10 Properties for Rent in Nakagyo-ku, Kyoto
(1K, Bathroom/Toilet)
• Subjects
12 University Students in their 20s
• Evaluation Items
Rent, Living Space, Convenience of Transportation, Con-
venience of Shopping, Surroundings Related to Hobbies
B. Calculation Method for Each Evaluation Item
• Rent
The score of the evaluation item regarding the rent of the
property below the upper rent limit (set by subjects) is set
as 100, and if the rent is above the upper limit, it ranges
from 0 to 100 (Upper limit + 30% or more: Score 0).
• Living Space
The score of the evaluation item regarding the living
space (which is wider than the requirement) is set to 100,
and if it is below the lower limit, it is set in the range of
0 to 100 (0m2: Score 0).
• Transportation Convenience
Depending on the walking distance to the nearest train
station and bus stop, scores for the evaluation items range
from 0 to 100 (50 for train station, 50 for bus stop)
(1000m (train station)/500m (bus stop): Score 0).
• Shopping Convenience
Scores of this evaluation item are set in the range of 0 to
Fig. 2. Comparison of the ranking between the proposed method and baseline
methods based on nDCG@5.
100 depending on the walking distance to the nearest con-
venience store and supermarket (50 for convenience store,
50 for supermarket) (500m (convenience store)/1000m
(supermarket): Score 0).
• Surroundings Related to Hobbies
According to the walking distance to the nearest spot
related to the subject’s hobbies, set evaluation item scores
in the range of 0 to 50 (1000m: Score 0).
The sum of these five evaluation item scores is applied as the
personalized score of the rental property.
C. Experimental Results
Figure 2 shows the comparison of ranking accuracy between
the proposed method and the baseline method based on
nDCG@5. (Before the experiment, each subject was asked to
rank 10 rental properties in which they would like to live, and
it was used as the ground truth). We noticed that the nDCG@5
of personalized ranking for the proposed method is the highest.
IV. CONCLUSION
We proposed a personalized scoring system that takes into
account the surrounding environment of rental properties.
The personalized scoring method (proposed) achieved better
results than the baseline method. The experimental results
demonstrate the effectiveness of a personalized scoring method
that takes into account multiple evaluation items (e.g., hobbies
and nearby related facilities). In the future, we are going to
add new evaluation items and improve the calculation method
of each evaluation item.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work was supported in part by JSPS KAKENHI
(19H04118, 20H04293 and 22H03700) and by a joint research
project (M2001) of Kyoto Sangyo University.
REFERENCES
[1] X. Yuan, et al. “Toward a user-oriented recommendation system for real
estate websites,” Information Systems, 38.2 (2013): 231-243.
[2] H. Suwa, A. Otsubo, Y. Nakamura, and M. Noguchi, “Construction
and Evaluation of Rental Property Comfort Index by IoT Sensing (in
Japanese),” The 34th Annual Conference of the Japanese Society for
Artificial Intelligence, 2020, pp. 529–551.
[3] S. Motomura, H. Takagi, “Study on Retrieval of Rental Apartments
Database Using Acceptability Functions (in Japanese),” Fuzzy System
Symposium 2018 (FSS2018), 2018, pp.775–780.
[4] https://github.com/WorksApplications/chiVe (the date of the last access:
Dec 18, 2022)
4
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-055-1
WEB 2023 : The Eleventh International Conference on Building and Exploring Web Based Environments

