A Web-based Collaborative Tool for Land Use Computation on Satellite Images 
 
Maria Grazia Albanesi, Riccardo Amadeo 
 Dept. of Electrical, Computer and Biomedical Engineering 
 University of Pavia 
Pavia, Italy 
e-mail: mariagrazia.albanesi@unipv.it, riccardo.amadeo@gmail.com 
 
Abstract— In this paper, we present the prototype of a new tool 
for computing land use on satellite images. Its main feature is 
the possibility of being used in a collaborative Web-based 
environment, where multiple expert users cooperate in 
validating the territory classification of different areas, 
according to the presence or absence of anthropic activity. For 
land use estimation, we use a well-known indicator in 
literature, namely the Anthropentropy Factor (AF). The 
novelty of the approach is the use of open software libraries, 
based on Keyhole Markup Language (KML), and Google 
Application Programming Interfaces (API) for the AF 
computation; the conceptual approach has been compared to 
other previously implemented solutions, namely the use of 
proprietary, ad hoc software tool and the use of Geographic 
Information System software on European Corine Land Cover 
data sets. A preliminary result of the work in progress is 
presented and commented. 
Keywords- Land use; satellite images; anthropentropy factor; 
Web-based application. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
The present paper describes a work in progress of a 
research project related to a great critical issue in 
environment preservation: land use estimation. Preserving 
lands, i.e., the wild, natural territory from the negative 
consequences of an inappropriate, out of control urban 
expansion, is one of the most important target for 
biodiversity preservation [1]. The percentage of land that 
annually is subtracted to natural, wild eco-systems for human 
activities expansion, has been estimated in the 36 European 
countries about 112000 ha/year in the period 2000-2006, 
reaching the percentage of 9% in the most urbanized 
countries [2].  
Land use is not only due to urbanization, i.e., the 
expansion of rural and urban settlements, but also to the 
creation of industrial, intensive farming and touristic sites, 
roads and communication lines. We refer to all these 
activities as anthropic activities, and the consequent land 
occupation as anthropic places. Therefore, in the analysis of 
the territory we considered an anthropic area if it is occupied 
by signs of human presence, such as buildings, paved roads 
and railways, places of intensive agriculture, and industrial 
settlements, both for production and services.  
Despite the great importance of land use estimation, its 
computation is far to be simple and fast: obtaining data about 
the territory and validating the area distribution of anthropic 
places is a long-time consuming process, even if the modern 
image satellite acquisition and processing have partially 
simplified the task. In fact, satellite images have to be 
processed in order to classify each pixel to anthropic places 
or not, and this is far to be completely automatized by low-
level image processing techniques. For this reason, the 
project here described aims at giving a possible answer to the 
problem of a fast and easy-to-update process for validating 
the territory occupation and computing the land use 
indicator. 
The paper is organized as follows: in Section II, a 
discussion about the choice of land use indicator is given. In 
Section III, a synthetic definition of AF helps the reader to 
understand the computational steps realized in the Web-
based prototype. In Section IV, a discussion about related 
works on AF computation is given, in order to distinguish 
the novelties of the Web-based collaborative solution. In 
Section V, the details of the prototype, the computer 
technologies (languages and tools), and data formats are 
discussed. Conclusion and hints about future work end the 
paper. 
II. 
THE CHOICE OF LAND USE INDICATOR 
In this research, we choose the indicator of land use 
named Anthropentropy Factor (AF in the following) [3]; this 
neologism is derived from the Greek term Anthropos 
(Άνθρωπος) = man, and entropy and express, in a 
quantitative way, the “disorder” introduced in a natural, wild 
eco-system by the presence of human beings and their 
related anthropic activities. The peculiarity of this indicator 
is that it expresses the anthropic impact on land use not only 
by computing the simple percentage of soil occupied by 
human activities and urban expansion, but it takes into 
consideration also the shape of the anthropic areas subtracted 
to nature. In this way, the indicator gives also information 
about another aspect for land use, i.e., land fragmentation, 
which is considered by the UN Convention on Biological 
Diversity [4] as the major threat on species biodiversity 
preservation, because it limits the wandering and spreading 
of animals. In fact, after the first step of territory analysis for 
defining the anthropic areas, information about their shapes 
and contiguity is taken into consideration by expanding their 
boundaries in the two dimensions and, consequently, by 
increasing their size. The extension has two main purposes: 
first of all, it takes into account the negative effects due to 
noise and pollution close to the boundaries of the anthropic 
places. Secondly, if anthropic areas are sufficiently close 
each other, the enlargement causes an effect of filling small 
holes, which produces wider areas to be considered in the 
final computation of the land use indicator. At time of 
24
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-636-1
WEB 2018 : The Sixth International Conference on Building and Exploring Web Based Environments

writing, the AF is the only indicator in literature which take 
into account the fragmentation of an anthropic place instead 
only the simple numeric value of its area. 
III. 
THE ANTHROPENTROPY FACTOR   
In this Section, we recall briefly the AF definition, in 
order to understand how it is computed in the core of the 
Web based collaborative tool here described. The procedure 
of the computation of the AF consists of the following five 
steps: 
1) Let us consider a generic geographic region bounded 
by recognized borders; in this project, and in all the previous 
research activities, we considered as target territory the 
municipality, because in Italy the municipality is the 
administrative body in charge of deciding policies for land 
destination and preservation. Let define as S the area (in 
squared kilometres) of a target municipality under 
investigation. 
2) Within the target municipality, the satellite image of 
this territory is analyzed to classify each pixel if belonging to 
either an anthropic area or to a wild natural area. This step is 
performed in a semiautomatic way by analysing the satellite 
images. After an initial automatic pre-processing for 
boundaries 
delimitation 
and 
road 
extraction, 
the 
classification is performed and validated by human experts.  
3) We define a neutral sub-region (Neutral Zone) as the 
part of target territory containing at inland water (lakes, 
rivers) extending more than two squared kilometres and/or 
areas located more than 3,000 m above sea level. Let define 
NA as the area (in squared kilometres) of the Neutral Zone. 
4) Each area occupied by anthropic places is enlarged 
along its boundaries with a buffer of 50 meters. The reason 
of this numerical choice is fully discussed in our previous 
works [3,5] and is here omitted for brevity. The enlargement 
is conceptually equivalent to the morphological image 
processing operation of dilation [6] with a circle of radius of 
50 meters. We define the union of all the anthropic enlarged 
areas as Death Zone of the region, i.e., the zone where 
natural wildness is completely lost (dead) for the human 
anthropic influence. Let define DA as the area (in squared 
kilometres) of the Death Zone. 
5) We define the Anthropentropy Factor AF as the ratio: 
 
AF = DA / (S – NA) 
 
The AF is a real number in the range [0-1]. The higher is 
AF, the more critical is the situation for what concern land 
use and environmental preservation of wild ecosystems. For 
sake of completeness, the special case of NA = S is not 
considered, as it would mean that the entire target territory is 
occupied by water or it is located above 3,000 m above the 
sea, thus it is not suitable to land use and the computation of 
FA becomes meaningless. 
IV. 
EXISTING APPROACHES AND NOVELTY OF WEB-BASED 
SOLUTION 
At time of writing, no related works are present in 
literature about Web-based approaches for AF computation. 
Moreover, contributions are presents for other interesting 
computations about land use, but they refer to particular 
aspects of land data analysis and processing, e.g., 
hydrological change impact assessment [7], or the issue of 
sharing and integrating different geo-analysis models across 
an open web environment [8]. For this reason, in order to 
appreciate the novelties of the work in progress here 
presented, we chose to compare it to the different approaches 
used in our previous research activities involving AF 
indicator [3,5]. The relation between our current work and 
the previous ones is that the main goal of the research in 
[3,5] was to define the new indicator and to prove its efficacy 
in expressing the real situation of land exploitation; on the 
other hand, in the present paper we focus our attention on 
some critical issues of AF computation and we propose, as a 
possible solution, a Web-based collaborative framework on 
Google Earth satellite maps. 
The AF indicator was first proposed in the Italian 
National project called ACI project (Antropentropia Comuni 
Italiani, i.e., Anthropentropy of Italian Municipalities) [3]. 
The initial, ambitious goal was to map the entire complete 
Italian territory in such a way that, for each of the 8092 
Italian municipalities, the AF is computed according to (1). 
However, this goal has been disregarded, as the mapping of 
land use was possible only for seven of the twenty regions of 
Italy. In fact, the main problem is data availability, i.e., a 
suitable description of the territory in order to determine the 
position and extension of the anthropic places. At this 
purpose, the ACI project adopted two possible approaches. 
The first one refers to the data-set obtained by the Corine 
Land Cover (CLC) project [9]; the definition of CLC data-set 
started in 1990 and periodically, data are updated. 
Unfortunately, this approach has two big critical issues: first, 
Corine data set was not available for all the Italian territory, 
but only for 7 regions (over a total of 20 regions), namely for 
the 40,9% of municipalities (3311 over 8092). The second 
critical issue of this approach is the slowness of data update. 
As the validation of CLC data is a time-consuming process, 
the CLC data-sets refer to a description of the land use of 
several years before. For example, in 2018 the most recent 
CLC data-set of Italian territory refers to year 2012. The 
CLC data-set have been processed using standard 
Geographic 
Information 
System 
(GIS) 
software 
to 
implement the procedure to compute the values of AF 
according to (1). We called this first solution AF 
Computation based on CLC/GIS approach. 
The second approach uses open data (Google Earth 
maps) and ask to users of a social network to generate the 
images of Death and Neutral Zones of a territory of a 
municipality under investigation. The images has been 
collected at the Computational Sustainability Unit at the 
Department of Electrical, Computer and Biomedical 
Engineering of Pavia University, were a software based on 
Matlab framework has been developed for AF computation. 
We have called this approach AF computation based on User 
Generated Content and open data (UGC/Open data). The 
main drawback of this approach is, as every solution based 
on crowdsourcing, the fact that its success is related to the 
degree 
of 
participation 
of 
the 
user 
community. 
25
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-636-1
WEB 2018 : The Sixth International Conference on Building and Exploring Web Based Environments

Unfortunately, this was not confirmed in the course of the 
project, and with this approach only the small percentage of 
0,5% of the Italian municipalities was covered. 
The novelty of the project here reported is to combine the 
strength of the two previously described approaches and to 
overcome their main drawbacks. In fact, the project is based 
on open, very fast updated data of Google Earth, but their 
processing is performed in a Web environment by trusted 
users, i.e., experts able to use a Web based framework to run 
the software for Death Zone generation and AF computation. 
Moreover, this software has been completely rewritten in 
java, and the dependency on proprietary suite of Matlab has 
been abandoned. Therefore, this solution seems to overcome 
the main drawback of the first CLC/GIS approach, i.e., the 
slowness of data update, as Maps in Google Earth are 
updated annually, as well of the second approach 
(UGC/Open data), because of the adoption of open source 
software used by a limited community of experts allow a 
very fast AF computation, whose efficacy is not related to a 
social community participation. 
The present project uses the Web platform to share data 
and open software procedures in order to settle a 
collaborative environment for AF computation. Experts 
access maps of the territory of all the Italian Municipalities 
and can share intermediate results or work in collaborative 
form. For example, more than one expert user can analyse 
the territory of the same municipality to classify the 
anthropic areas and apply the dilation operation to generate 
the boundaries of the Death Zone.  
V. 
THE WEB-BASED COLLABORATIVE PROTOTYPE 
In this work in progress, we present here the general 
framework of the system and a preliminary result of AF 
computation on an entire municipality.  
A. Technologies and tools 
Several existing technologies and data sources are 
combined to realize the Web-based tool for AF computation 
on Google Earth images. First of all, we use an archive of 
shape files, downloaded from the official Italian National 
Institute of Statistics, to code territory boundaries 
information of all the 8092 Italian municipalities [10]. 
 Then we used the free and open source QGIS software 
[11] to convert shape files into KML files. KML is an XML-
based language for the management of three-dimensional 
geospatial data and it is used in several popular software, 
such as Google Earth and Google Maps. Successively, we 
developed Java code to subdivide the original KML file in 
multiple files, one for each municipality, in order to load 
them separately, by the Web tool, in a typical Google map 
interface. After these preliminary steps of converting and 
importing files in the proper environment, the software 
development used Google Maps API’s to add drawing layers 
on a simple map object using the Drawing tools and the 
library Turfjs [12], which makes available JavaScript 
functions for advanced geospatial analysis in browsers. The 
code refers also to the GeoJSON open standard format, 
designed for representing simple geographical features, 
along with their non-spatial attributes. 
 
Figure 1.  
Graphical controls for AF computation. 
 
Figure 2.  
Two  anthropic areas (in blue) inside a forest. 
By 
combining 
graphical 
primitives 
with 
image 
processing functions, we coded and implemented the Web-
based prototype for AF computation. 
B. Funcionality and preliminary results  
First of all, expert and trusted users are authorized to 
access the data of the projects by a simple login/password 
procedure in a browser. The user can choose the 
municipality for which the AF indicator has to be computed, 
by starting a new project on its territory, or edit an existing 
one. The projects can be public and shared with other users. 
The graphical tools implemented in the project allow to 
draw the boundaries of the anthropic areas in the target 
territory, or edit, cancel or modify them. Anthropic areas are 
automatically coloured by the graphical tools in blue. Neutral 
areas are coloured in yellow. By using Google Maps API’s 
we created drawing layers on a simple map object by 
embedding drawing tools for inserting circles, polygons, 
polylines, rectangles and by defining figures using WGS84 
coordinates, directly attaching them on the map. Moreover, 
the developed software provides the definition of several 
polygon attributes, such as fill colour, border colour, and 
opacity. The information (coordinates, boundaries) related to 
each anthropic area is added to the map object in a custom 
data layer. Four graphical controls (see Figure 1) are added 
to Google Earth maps: Occupied area (polygon denoting 
urbanized, anthropic areas) Neutral area (polygon denoting 
stretches of water, such as lakes, lagoons, whose area is 
higher than 2 square km or lands with an altitude higher than 
3000 m), Rubber (polygon that clears the inside area) and 
Undo (to undo the last graphical operation on the map). 
Figure 2 shows an example of drawing two polygons, in 
order  to define two anthropic areas of houses inside a forest. 
Other implemented functions manage polygon operation, 
such as intersection, sum, subtraction and expansion. In fact, 
anthropic areas have to be checked to verify if they do not 
exit the boundaries of the municipality: in this case the 
polygon area is reduced to fit the boundaries. 
26
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-636-1
WEB 2018 : The Sixth International Conference on Building and Exploring Web Based Environments

 
Figure 3.  
Drawing overlapping polygons. On the left: an exisitng 
polygon (in bue) and a new area, delimited by its corners (white dots). On 
the right: the result of polygon union. 
 
Figure 4.  AF computation on Google Earth map for the municipaliaty of 
Verbania, Italy. 
Moreover, whenever the user add a new polygon, the 
software verifies if it intersects other polygons already 
present in the map. If it does, the two polygons are 
substituted by their union (see Figure 3). This step may last 
several days and intermediate results may be saved on a 
server. In a successive session, the analysis may be restarted 
at the point of the last save operation, by the same user or by 
other users, in a full collaborative and shared manner. Once 
the territory has been completely analyzed, the blue areas are 
ready for the dilation and the definition of the Death Zone. 
The Java routines enlarge the blue areas according to the 
dilation operation, in order to generate automatically the 
Death Zone. Moreover, the software reads the values of S 
from the internal database and computes the values of DA, 
NA for the final computation of AF indicator, according to 
(1). This value can be saved in the project for a further check 
or saved in the internal database, to associate to the 
municipality under investigation the value of AF indicator 
and the year the map refers to.  In Figure 4, the first example 
of the map analysis and computation of the land use indicator 
on an entire municipality is shown: it refers to the 
municipality of Verbania (North Italy, Lat. 45°55′16″ N, 
Long. 8°33′06″ E). The yellow area refer to the lake Lago 
Maggiore, the red area to the computed Death Zone after 
dilation. For this municipality, the AF computation is equal 
to 0.5654, showing a worrying situation: more than half of 
the territory has been completely anthropized.  
IV. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
As pointed out at the beginning of this paper, this is the 
description of a work in progress. The first results are very 
encouraging because the collaborative Web tool has proved 
to be an agile, simple and efficient framework to easily 
analyze up-to-date maps of the Italian territory and to 
compute in a fully automatic way the AF indicator.  
The project is being under development to validate the 
tool on a significant number of municipalities. Once we 
populated our database of a certain number of classified 
maps, future work will be related to the use of these data to 
train a machine learning algorithm to automatically classify 
unknown maps, without the human supervision.  
 
REFERENCES  
[1] LUCAS: Land Use and Land Cover survey, European 
Commission 
on 
Environment, 
http://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/statistics-
explained/index.php/LUCAS_-
_Land_use_and_land_cover_survey [retrieved: March, 2018]. 
[2] New guidelines to reduce soil sealing, European Commission 
Fact 
Sheet 
of 
2017, 
http://ec.europa.eu/environment/soil/sealing_guidelines.htm, 
[retrieved: March, 2018]. 
[3] M. G. Albanesi and R. Albanesi, “A New Approach Based on 
Computer Vision and Collaborative Social Networking for 
Environmental Preservation: Theory, Tools and Results of 
Italian ACI Project”, Proceedings of The Eighth International 
Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information 
Technology, Nice (France), 21-26 July 2013, pp. 16-21, 
Copyright (©) IARIA, 2013 
[4] Fragmentation of ecosystems and habitats by transport 
infrastructure, 
http://www.eea.europa.eu/data-and-
maps/indicators/fragmentation-of-land-and-forests/eu-ac-
fragmentation, [retrieved: March, 2018]. 
[5] M. G. Albanesi amd R. Albanesi, “A Decision-making 
Support System for Land Use Estimation Based on a New 
Anthropentropy 
Predictive 
Model 
for 
Environmental 
Preservation 
– 
Theory, 
Model 
and 
Web–based 
Implementation”, International Journal On Advances in 
Intelligent Systems, v 7 n 1&2, pp. 85-102, ISBN-1942-2679, 
Copyright (©) IARIA, 2014.  
[6] R. C. Gonzales and R. E. Woods, Digital Image Processing, 
3d efition, Pearson Prentice Hall, 2008, Chapter 9, 
“Morphological Image Processing”.  
[7] J.-Y. Choi, B. A. Engel, L. Theller, J. Harbor, “Utilizing 
Web-based GISand SDSS for Hydrological Land Use Change 
Impact Assessment”, Trans. of the ASAE. Vol. 48(2), pp.815-
822 , 2005. 
[8] S.Yue, M. Chen, Y. Wen, G. Lu, “Service-oriented model-
encapsulation 
strategy 
for 
sharing 
and 
integrating 
heterogeneous geo-analysis models in an open web 
environment”, ISPRS Journal of Photogrammetry and Remote 
Sensing, Elsevier, vol. 114, pp. 258-273, April 2016. 
[9] Commission of the European Communities: Corine Land 
Cover Project, http://www.eea.europa.eu/publications/COR0-
landcover [retrieved: March, 2018]. 
[10] ISTAT 
On 
Line 
Municipality 
Database: 
https://www.istat.it/it/archivio/6789 [retrieved: March, 2018]. 
[11] QGIS software: http://www.qgis.org/, [retrieved: March, 
2018].  
[12] Turfjs home page, http://turfjs.org/ [retrieved: March, 2018]. 
 
27
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-636-1
WEB 2018 : The Sixth International Conference on Building and Exploring Web Based Environments

