Heart Rate Monitoring and Activity Recognition using Wearables
Toon De Pessemier, Enias Cailliau, and Luc Martens
imec - WAVES - Ghent University
Technologiepark-Zwijnaarde 15
9052 Ghent, Belgium
Email: toon.depessemier@ugent.be enias.cailliau@ugent.be luc1.martens@ugent.be
Abstract—Wearables enable measuring physical activities and
heart rate using accelerometer and heart rate sensor. However,
the output of these sensors is often aggregated into a general
activity status without detailed analysis and the link between
activity recognition and heart rate measurement is often missing
in health apps. This paper compares heart rate measurements
during physical activity of three wearable devices: a specialized
sports device with chest strap, a ﬁtness tracker, and a smart
watch. Due to unintended shifts of the device with respect to
the wrist, the ﬁtness tracker and smart watch have difﬁculties
to measure sudden variations in heart rate. During the physical
activity, movements of the user’s wrist were measured using the
accelerometer of the wearable. Correlations in the data patterns
of the heart rate sensor and accelerometer are identiﬁed. Both
sensors are used as input for personal recommendations for
physical activities with a rule based ﬁlter. These recommendations
are tailored to the user’s physical capabilities and preferences
by matching them to a user proﬁle that is learned from the
user’s data. Combining the insights from heart rate sensor and
accelerometer may allow to improve the accuracy of detecting
physical activities, estimate the intensity of an activity, and
generate more accurate recommendations.
Keywords–Activity Recognition; Health Information; Recom-
mendation; Personalization.
I.
INTRODUCTION
The last decade, more formal and informal health in-
formation has become available, with the perspective of a
new generation of well-informed, healthy individuals. This
phenomenon turns users into health information producers
and consumers by offering a multitude of health information
services and data [1][2].
To cope with the problem of information overload incurred
by this growing availability of data, recommender systems
are used as an effective information ﬁlter and at the same
time as a tool for providing personal suggestions [3][4]. These
recommenders may suggest a speciﬁc ﬁtness activity or a
running trail out of the many available physical activities. But
good recommendations should match the physical capabilities
of each individual.
To assess the physical load of an activity for a user, measur-
ing the user’s physical movements (e.g., using a pedometer) is
insufﬁcient, since this neglects the user’s effort with respect to
his/her physical capacities. The user’s physical limits and the
intensity of an activity for a user can be estimated by the com-
bination of heart rate measurements and motion sensors [5].
Recent wearable devices are often equipped with accelerome-
ters for measuring movements and heart rate sensors. However,
the accuracy of heart rate measurements using these devices
is still unclear.
For heart rate monitoring, various methods exist. For this
study with wearables, the two most important methods are
electrocardiography and photoplethysmography. Electrocardio-
graphy (ECG) is the process of recording the electrical activity
of the heart using electrodes placed on the skin [6]. These
electrodes detect the small electrical changes on the skin that
arise from the heart muscle’s electrophysiologic pattern of
depolarizing during each heartbeat. For medical purposes, e.g.,
in hospitals, this technique is applied with 10 electrodes, placed
on the patient’s limbs and on the surface of the chest.
Photoplethysmography (PPG), also known as optical heart
rate sensing, is monitoring heart rate using photo diodes and
LEDs [7]. Green light is absorbed by blood, hence its red color.
When a light source is covered by a body part (e.g., the wrist in
case of a wearable), the light is partially absorbed by the blood
and partially reﬂected. The photo diode captures the reﬂected
light. During a heart beat, more light is absorbed and the photo
diode detects a reduction in green light intensity. Although a
green LED provides the most accurate results, an infrared LED
is often used since this consumes less energy. PPG is a cheap
method for measuring heart rate, often used in wearables,
but has some disadvantages. Motion artifacts can reduce the
accuracy during exercises and free living conditions. Person-
dependent variations may also inﬂuence the measurements,
e.g., a different blood perfusion induces a different absorption
of light. This paper discusses the use of PPG in wearables for
heart rate measuring (Section IV).
Besides heart rate measurements, wearables can perform
activity recognition based on the motion detected by the
accelerometer. This typically results in a few statistics about
the user’s physical activity, such as the number of steps taken
or the average speed of a running session; but the recognition
of speciﬁc physical exercises is often still missing. More
advanced solutions for activity recognition are often relying
on multiple sensors placed on different parts of the body,
e.g., on the chest and on the hip, composing a body sensor
network [8]. However, this is often considered too intrusive
for daily activities. Therefore, this study investigates activity
recognition using popular wearable devices (Section V).
The goal of this study is to investigate the accuracy of heart
rate measurements obtained with different wearables, and to
analyze if measurements of heart rate sensor and accelerom-
eter can be combined for an accurate activity recognition.
According to our knowledge, this is one of the ﬁrst studies
that compares wearables worn around the wrist and a sports
10
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-636-1
WEB 2018 : The Sixth International Conference on Building and Exploring Web Based Environments

device with a chest strap for heart rate measurements during
a physical activity with a lot of movement of the wrist. These
measurement data are the input of recommender systems,
which can improve human-web interaction by personalizing
interfaces of web applications with tailored suggestions for
physical activities. This study presents a rule based ﬁlter as
recommender system.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows.
Section II refers to interesting related work. An overview
of the wearable devices used in this study is provided in
Section III. The next sections discuss the measurements of
the wearables: the heart rate measurements are discussed in
Section IV, activity recognition is the topic of Section V,
and the usage of the combination of both is covered in
Section VI. Section VII is about the rule based ﬁlter to
generate personalized recommendations. Section VIII draws
conclusions and points to future work.
II.
RELATED WORK
The rising interest in health-related data and applications
strengthens the need to monitor heart rate and automatically
recognize physical activities on a daily basis. Although the
commercial sports devices and wearables are equipped with
the necessary hardware to accomplish this challenging task,
their accuracy is still unclear.
For commercially available breast belt measuring devices,
detailed evaluations of the accuracy have been performed [9].
But for recent wearable devices, only a limited number of
studies investigated the accuracy of heart rate data, often
in speciﬁc conditions. In non-moving conditions, heart rate
monitoring using a wrist-worn personal ﬁtness tracker has been
evaluated with patients in an intensive care unit [10]. The
measured values were slightly lower than those derived from
continuous electrocardiographic monitoring, i.e., the medical
method for heart rate monitoring. The authors concluded that
further evaluation is required to investigate if personal ﬁtness
trackers can be used in hospitals, e.g., as early warning sys-
tems. Another very related study has investigated the accuracy
of step counts and heart rate monitoring with wearables [11].
Test subjects were asked to walk a speciﬁc number of steps
during the measurements. The accuracy of the heart rate
measurements with the tested wearable devices showed to
be very high. Our paper contributes to the domain of health
monitoring with wearables by studying the accuracy of heart
rate measurements during intensive physical activities, and
with various types of wearable devices.
In the domain of activity recognition with wearables, the
focus is often on the classiﬁcation of movement or transporta-
tion types. Hidden Markov models have been proposed [12]
to recognize different physical activities, such as driving a car,
riding a bicycle, walking, or standing still. In recent Android
versions, similar activity recognition functionality is available
through Google’s activity recognition API [13]. In contrast,
our research targets activities that cannot be classiﬁed based
on the movement speed, but are characterized by speciﬁc hand
or arm movements, such as Dumbbell Biceps Curl exercises.
Our focus is on recognizing the number of repetitions in view
of tracking the physical load, rather than on classifying the
activities.
The growing availability of these health data on the
World Wide Web has brought the problem of information
overload [14] to the ehealth domain. For instance, too many
sports schedules are available in online databases, but only a
minority is matching the physical capabilities and preferences
of an individual. This emphasizes the need to personalize
health information and services, i.e., “adapting the content,
with the aid of computers, to the speciﬁc characteristics of
a particular person” [15]. Personalized recommendations, tai-
lored messages, and customized information have shown to be
far more effective than the non-personalized alternative [3][4].
Unfortunately, many of these recommender systems rely on
the manual input of users reporting their performed exercises.
Our solution combines automatic activity recognition and heart
rate measurements, which are used as input for a rule-based
recommender system.
III.
WEARABLE DEVICES
For measuring heart rate, three types of wearables were
used: a smart watch, a ﬁtness tracker, and a specialized device.
A. Smart Watch
Smart watches are equipped with various sensors but are
not medically approved. The smart watch is a general purpose,
fashionable device with features such as tracking physical
activities and informing users. From a commercial viewpoint,
the target group of customers is not limited to sports people,
but includes also a broader group of people who like the design
or the extra features of the gadget. Smart watches often have
hardware capabilities allowing to extend their functionality
with additional apps. In this study, the Huawei Watch was used
as smart watch for the measurements because of its popularity
and typical smart watch characteristics (e.g., Android Wear).
Heart rate measurements are based on photoplethysmography.
To capture heart rate data in real time, a special Android
Wear app was developed for the Huawei Watch. This app
communicates with our developed Android app running on
a smartphone through the Wearable Data Layer API.
B. Fitness Tracker
These devices, typically worn around the wrist, measure
movements and behavior, such as the number of steps taken,
sleeping patterns, and sports activities, e.g., a light jog or a mad
sprint. As with smart watches, ﬁtness trackers are seldom ap-
proved for medical purposes. They are equipped with multiple
sensors, such as a 3-axis accelerometer to monitor movement
in every direction, an altimeter to measure altitude and keep
track of the traveled height, and sometimes a gyroscope to
measure orientation and rotation. Compared to smart watches,
ﬁtness trackers are more focused on tracking physical activi-
ties. In this study, the Microsoft Band 2 was chosen as ﬁtness
tracker because of two reasons. It allows real time analysis
of sensor data (heart rate data using photoplethysmography
and movement data through the accelerometer) and Microsoft
provides a comprehensive API. The API offers functionality,
such as aggregating the results of a query, thereby shifting the
computational load to the Microsoft servers.
C. Specialized Device
The main purpose of this type of devices is measuring heart
rate. Typical examples are pulse-oximeters, blood pressure
monitors, and heart rate chest straps. These often have only
a limited number of sensors and a limited number of features.
11
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-636-1
WEB 2018 : The Sixth International Conference on Building and Exploring Web Based Environments

In this study, the Polar H7 was used as specialized sports
device. This is a popular heart rate chest strap, which produces
very accurate measurements (correlation of 0.97 with true heart
rate [16]). Heart rate is measured using electrodes in the chest
strap that detect heart pulse via an electronic signal.
IV.
HEART RATE MEASUREMENTS
To gather, store, and analyze heart rate measurements of
these three device types, an Android app was developed and
deployed on a Google Nexus 6P smartphone. Figure 1 shows a
screenshot of this app. The wearable devices have a Bluetooth
communication link with this smartphone and the app has a
separate service running for each device to transfer the raw
data to the smartphone.
Figure 1. Screenshot of the Android app for gathering heart rate data.
A. In Rest Condition
To evaluate the accuracy of heart rate measurements of
the three device types, these heart rate measurements were
compared with the measurements of a specialized device
that is approved for medical purposes, i.e., the Omrom M6
Comfort [17]. The Omrom M6 is a blood pressure monitor,
which has to be attached around the upper arm for measuring
the heart rate. Heart rate was measured for two persons, in
a rest condition, in a home environment, at two different
times. The ﬁrst test subject (male) had a low natural heart
rate, whereas the second test subject (female) had a rather
high heart rate in rest condition. Table I shows for each
device the mean, standard deviation, and median, indicating
that all devices provide consistent results. The mean values
and small standard deviation show that in rest condition,
heart rate measurements obtained with these devices can be
considered as reliable. The measurements of the Omrom M6,
which is medically approved, are considered as the correct
heart rate. The measurements of the Polar H7 are the most
similar to the measurements of the Omrom M6. Since a blood
pressure monitor is rather expensive and not practical during
sports activities, the Omrom was not suitable to measure heart
rate during physical activities. Therefore, the Polar H7 was
considered as the reference device during physical activities.
B. During Physical Activity
Figure 2 shows the heart rate measurements obtained with
the different devices during physical activity, more speciﬁcally
Dumbbell Biceps Curl. These exercises for bicep muscles were
performed in a ﬁtness room by two people. Similar results
are obtained for both persons (results are shown for only
one person). During physical activities, such as Dumbbell
Biceps Curl, measuring heart rate cannot be performed with
the blood pressure monitor due to body movements and the
non-wearable characteristic of the Omrom M6. For the three
wearable devices, a signiﬁcantly different signal of the heart
rate measurements can be witnessed during this physical
activity.
Figure 2. Heart rate measurements during Dumbbell Biceps Curl.
The heart rate signal produced by the Polar H7 clearly
shows a repetitive pattern that corresponds to the repetitions
of the Dumbbell Biceps Curl exercise. The accurate measure-
ments can be explained by the use of the chest strap, which is
less inﬂuenced by movements than the devices worn around
the wrist.
The heart rate registered by the Microsoft Band 2 is
consistently lower than the values measured by the Polar
device. Moreover, rapidly varying heart rates due to periods of
intensive physical activity are difﬁcult to detect. As a result, the
subsequent repetitions of the physical exercise are not clearly
visible in the graph of the Microsoft Band in Figure 2.
With the Huawei Watch, less measurement samples are
obtained compared to the Polar H7 and the Microsoft Band.
Movements of this device, which is worn around the wrist,
cause interruptions in the measurement process. Changes in
the device’s position relative to the wrist induce a sensor
recalibration and can be noticed in Figure 2 as the time periods
without measurement data from the Huawei Watch. Periods of
intensive physical activities are noticeable by the variations in
the data of the heart rate measurements. But the interruptions
in the measurement data might be a problem for detailed heart
rate monitoring during physical activities.
V.
ACTIVITY RECOGNITION
In order to monitor the proper execution of physical
exercises by users, wearables can be used to register speciﬁc
physical movements. The Dumbbell Biceps Curl exercise is
a typical activity that allows detection of repetitions of this
12
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-636-1
WEB 2018 : The Sixth International Conference on Building and Exploring Web Based Environments

TABLE I. MEAN ¯x, STANDARD DEVIATION σ, AND MEDIAN ˜x OF THE HEART RATE IN REST CONDITION WITH TWO USERS AT TWO TIMES
User 1 - Test 1
User 1 - Test 2
User 2 - Test 1
User 2 - Test 2
Device
¯x ± σ
˜x
¯x ± σ
˜x
¯x ± σ
˜x
¯x ± σ
˜x
Smart Watch (Huawei Watch)
55±2.0
55
55±2.0
56
73±3.3
73
72±3.2
71
Fitness Tracker (Microsoft Band)
50±2.9
50
64±6.0
64
75±3.3
75
76±1.7
76
Specialized Sports Device (Polar H7)
56±1.7
56
59±1.4
59
77±3.0
76
80±3.7
79
Specialized Blood Pressure Monitor (Omrom M6)
55±2.8
55
58±2.9
58
76±2.5
76
84±4.2
84
exercise by using data of the accelerometer of the wearable
worn around the wrist. Figure 3 shows the pattern of the
accelerometer data, gathered with the ﬁtness tracker around
the wrist, during the execution of this exercise. Although the
execution speed of the activity and the body characteristics of
the user may have an inﬂuence on the absolute values of the
data of the accelerometer, the typical pattern consisting of local
minima and maxima can be witnessed for every repetition.
Figure 3. Measurements of the accelerometer of a wearable during
Dumbbell Biceps Curl.
Figure 4. Detailed view on the local optima in the accelerometer data during
Dumbbell Biceps Curl.
For each repetition of the Dumbbell Curl activity, 5 local
optima on the Z-axis and 3 on the X-axis can be witnessed as
visible in Figure 4: 1) a maximum on the Z-axis co-occuring
with a maximum on the X-axis, 2) a minimum on the Z-axis,
3) a maximum on the Z-axis co-occuring with a minimum on
the X-axis, 4) a minimum on the Z-axis, and 5) a maximum
on the Z-axis co-occuring with a maximum on the X-axis. The
red cross marks in Figure 4 denote the beginning and end of a
repetition of the exercise, the green check marks indicate the
intermediate optima. Recognizing the Dumbbell Biceps Curl
execution based on the identiﬁcation of a sequence of these
5 events has some beneﬁts. The recognition process requires
limited processing power, allowing real-time recognition (e.g.,
for e-coaching purposes) and making it usable on devices
with limited processing power, such as wearables. Moreover,
the detection of local optima makes the recognition method
directly usable for different variations of the Dumbbell Curl,
such as Concentration Curl, Hammer Curl, and Barbell Curl.
VI.
HEART RATE AND ACTIVITY RECOGNITION
COMBINED
Monitoring heart rate and simultaneously recognizing rep-
etitions of an activity with the accelerometer allow a better
health monitoring and e-coaching during workouts. Since raw
data streams of both sources (heart rate sensor and accelerom-
eter) are suffering from inaccuracies, the combination of both
can improve health monitoring. For example, the intensity of
a physical activity for an individual can be estimated based on
the heart rate data. But in case of measurement interruptions in
the heart rate data, accelerometer data can be used to estimate
the performed physical activities.
For e-coaching purposes, our Android app uses both data
sources to instruct the user during physical exercises thereby
maintaining a healthy heart rate. Repetitions of an exercise are
recognized and through text-to-speech techniques the repeti-
tions are counted aloud or shown on the screen of the wearable.
Each physical activity has a target range of the heart rate that
can be expected during the performance. If the measured heart
rate is out of this range, the user is warned by a clear indication
on the screen of the wearable. After performing an activity,
the app evaluates the intensity of the physical exercise as “too
intensive”, “to easy”, or “just good”.
VII.
USER PROFILING AND RECOMMENDATIONS
The physical exercises measured with the accelerometer,
the heart rate, and the characteristics of the exercises are
stored online in a user proﬁle. Users can access their proﬁle
using a web application to analyze their history of physical
activities. Moreover, this user proﬁle is used for personalization
of suggestions for new activities in our Android app, such as
a set of Dumbell Biceps Curl exercises, a running track, a
cycling track, etc.
To match the user’s preferences and physical capabilities
to the physical activities and select the most suitable ones as
recommendations, the activities of each type are processed by
a specialized rule based ﬁlter. This rule based ﬁlter makes
a selection of the activities based on characteristics of that
13
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-636-1
WEB 2018 : The Sixth International Conference on Building and Exploring Web Based Environments

type of activity, e.g., the distance for a running activity or
the weight and number of repetitions for Dumbbell Biceps
Curl. For each type of activity, a separate rule based ﬁlter is
used in order to take into account the user’s experience level
for each activity individually. For example, suppose a user is
an excellent runner. Recommendations for intensive running
activities will be the most suitable, given the user’s physical
capabilities and history. Now, suppose that this user visits the
gym for the ﬁrst time with the goal of training the arm muscles.
The user’s body is not used to intensive Dumbell Biceps Curl
activities. Recommendations at the level of starting users might
be appropriate here. Therefore, a separate rule based ﬁlter is
assigned to each activity type to handle these differences in
training level for users. In future work, explanations about the
recommendations can be added in order to further convince
the user to adopt one of the offered recommendations [18].
These explanations can be expressed in terms of (the progress
of) the physical capabilities of the user.
The rule based functionality is implemented based on
Drools [19]. Drools is a business rules management system
with business rules engine that is scalable and extendible
through the use of drl ﬁles containing the rules. The goal of
these rules is to ﬁlter the available activities in order to come up
with the most suitable activity for the user taking into account
the conditions/context at the moment of the recommendation.
Figure 5. Graphical overview of the rule based ﬁltering of the activities.
Figure 5 gives a graphical overview of the rule based
ﬁltering that is applied to the activities. The rules check
the following conditions: 1) User proﬁle: Do the length and
intensity of the cycling or running track match the user’s
physical capabilities and habits? The target length of a track
is similar to the length of the tracks in the user’s history,
but a small difference is tolerated. The intensity of the track
is estimated based on the difference in altitude meters. For
gym exercises, the intensity is estimated based on the weight
or resistance of the ﬁtness equipment and the number of
repetitions. 2) Weather: Does the activity match the current
weather conditions? For example, outdoor running activities
are not recommended when it rains. To retrieve weather data at
the user’s location, the OpenWeatherMap.org REST API [20]
is used. 3) Energy Mood: Does the activity match the user’s
energy level of the moment? The energy mood is a value,
ranging from 0 to 5, that users can specify in the Android
app to express their current feeling, e.g., energetic, tired, or
something in between.
VIII.
CONCLUSION
This study discussed the usage of wearables for heart
rate measurements and the automatic recognition of physical
activities. Measurements with a ﬁtness tracker and a smart
watch showed to be very accurate in case of limited physical
movement, e.g., in a state of rest. In contrast, a discrepancy
in the measurements of the wearables is witnessed during
intensive physical activities (Dumbbell Biceps Curl). Shifts
of the wearable with respect to the position of the wrist
induce inaccuracies or even interruptions in the measurement
process thereby hindering the monitoring of heart rate vari-
ations. Specialized sports devices, using a sensor with chest
strap, produce more accurate heart rate measurements, even
during intensive physical activities, and enable recognizing
subsequent repetitions of a physical activity based on the
periodic peaks in the heart rate. Therefore, our advise is to
use a device with a chest strap for heart rate measurements in
case of physical activities that involve a lot of movement of
the wrist.
Besides, raw data produced by the accelerometer of wear-
ables can be used to recognize repetitions of physical exercises
with characteristic movements of wrist/hand/arm. E.g., the
Dumbbell Biceps Curl exercise can be recognized based on
a speciﬁc pattern with 5 local optima on the X and Z-axis
of accelerometer data. Both raw data streams (heart rate and
accelerometer data) can be combined for further analysis, but
also to assist the user in coaching tasks, such as counting the
number of times an exercise is performed, or instructing to
decrease or increase the intensity of the exercise. Automatic
activity recognition can help the user by reducing the burden of
providing input about the performed activities in digital health
services or ﬁtness apps. Moreover, recognized activities can
be stored in a user proﬁle, which can be used as an indicator
for the user’s physical capabilities and habits. Based on this
proﬁle, the current weather, and the user’s mood, personalized
recommendations are generated using a set of rule based ﬁlters.
In future research, we will investigate the recognition of other
physical exercises and relate the resulting accelerometer data
to heart rate data more in depth.
REFERENCES
[1]
G. Eysenbach, “Consumer health informatics,” British medical journal,
vol. 320, no. 7251, 2000, p. 1713.
[2]
R. J. Cline and K. M. Haynes, “Consumer health information seeking
on the internet: the state of the art,” Health education research, vol. 16,
no. 6, 2001, pp. 671–692.
[3]
V. J. Strecher et al., “The effects of computer-tailored smoking cessation
messages in family practice settings,” Journal of Family Practice,
vol. 39, no. 3, 1994, pp. 262–270.
14
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-636-1
WEB 2018 : The Sixth International Conference on Building and Exploring Web Based Environments

[4]
M. K. Campbell et al., “Improving dietary behavior: the effectiveness of
tailored messages in primary care settings.” American journal of public
health, vol. 84, no. 5, 1994, pp. 783–787.
[5]
P. S. Freedson and K. Miller, “Objective monitoring of physical activity
using motion sensors and heart rate,” Research quarterly for exercise
and sport, vol. 71, no. sup2, 2000, pp. 21–29.
[6]
L. N. Katz and A. Pick, Clinical electrocardiography.
Lea & Febiger,
1956.
[7]
A. Reisner, P. A. Shaltis, D. McCombie, and H. H. Asada, “Utility
of the photoplethysmogram in circulatory monitoring,” The Journal of
the American Society of Anesthesiologists, vol. 108, no. 5, 2008, pp.
950–958.
[8]
G. Plasqui, A. Bonomi, and K. Westerterp, “Daily physical activity
assessment with accelerometers: new insights and validation studies,”
Obesity Reviews, vol. 14, no. 6, 2013, pp. 451–462.
[9]
M. Weippert et al., “Comparison of three mobile devices for measuring
r–r intervals and heart rate variability: Polar s810i, suunto t6 and an
ambulatory ecg system,” European journal of applied physiology, vol.
109, no. 4, 2010, pp. 779–786.
[10]
R. R. Kroll, J. G. Boyd, and D. M. Maslove, “Accuracy of a wrist-
worn wearable device for monitoring heart rates in hospital inpatients:
A prospective observational study,” Journal of medical Internet research,
vol. 18, no. 9, 2016, p. 253.
[11]
F. El-Amrawy and M. I. Nounou, “Are currently available wearable
devices for activity tracking and heart rate monitoring accurate, precise,
and medically beneﬁcial?” Healthcare informatics research, vol. 21,
no. 4, 2015, pp. 315–320.
[12]
J. Lester, T. Choudhury, N. Kern, G. Borriello, and B. Hannaford, “A hy-
brid discriminative/generative approach for modeling human activities,”
in Proceedings of the 19th international joint conference on Artiﬁcial
intelligence.
Morgan Kaufmann Publishers Inc., 2005, pp. 766–772.
[13]
Google, “Activity Recognition API,” 2018, [Online] Retrieved March,
2018,
from
https://developers.google.com/android/reference/com/
google/android/gms/location/ActivityRecognitionApi.
[14]
L. Fernandez-Luque, R. Karlsen, and L. Vognild, “Challenges and
opportunities of using recommender systems for personalized health
education.” Studies in health technology and informatics, vol. 150, 2008,
pp. 903–907.
[15]
H. de Vries and J. Brug, “Computer-tailored interventions motivating
people to adopt health promoting behaviours: Introduction to a new
approach,” Patient Education and Counseling, vol. 36, no. 2, 1999, pp.
99–105.
[16]
M. Altini, “Heart Rate Variability for Training,” 2013, [Online] Re-
trieved March, 2018, from http://www.marcoaltini.com/blog/heart-rate-
variability.
[17]
Omron, “Automatic Blood Pressure Monitor - Model M6 Comfort
IT,” 2015, [Online] Retrieved March, 2018, from http://www.omron-
healthcare.com/en/support/manuals/download/m6-comfort-it-hem-
7322u-e-en.
[18]
N. Karacapilidis, S. Malefaki, and A. Charissiadis, “A novel framework
for augmenting the quality of explanations in recommender systems,”
Intelligent Decision Technologies, vol. 11, no. 2, 2017, pp. 187–197.
[19]
J. Community, “Drools - Business rules management System,” 2018,
[Online] Retrieved March, 2018, from http://www.drools.org/.
[20]
OpenWeatherMap, “Current weather and forecast,” 2018, [Online] Re-
trieved March, 2018, from http://openweathermap.org/.
15
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-636-1
WEB 2018 : The Sixth International Conference on Building and Exploring Web Based Environments

